The Project Gutenberg EBook of The King's Sons, by George Manville Fenn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The King's Sons

Author: George Manville Fenn

Illustrator: T.H. Robinson

Release Date: May 4, 2007 [EBook #21315]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KING'S SONS ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England





The King's Sons, by George Manville Fenn.

________________________________________________________________________

This is a very short book, and it does not contain any of the usual
nail-biting Fenn-style situations.  But it is very good at what it does,
which is to tell a story about King Ethelwulf of Wessex and his four
sons, each of whom in turn became King.

The story concentrates on the youngest of the sons, Alfred, who became
known as Alfred the Great during his reign.  The four boys have a tutor,
Father Swythe, but only Alfred is interested in what the monk has to
teach.  At this point we get a very interesting lesson on how the great
illustrated manuscripts were made, how the ink and the colours were
made, and how the pens and brushes were made.

Father Swythe later became Bishop of Winchester, and was known as
Swithun.  He was canonised, and somehow there has grown a legend that if
it rains on Saint Swithun's day it will rain for forty days after that.
He is portrayed as rather a portly monk in this story, but his effigy in
Winchester Cathedral shows him as a very slight man.  There is another
story about him which makes him out to be rather a small man, who
couldn't reach the key-hole of the cathedral, which obligingly slid down
for him.  Anyway, the story is a good one, and you will enjoy it.

This website is called Athelstane, after Alfred's grandson, so we were
interested to transcribe this story.  NH

________________________________________________________________________

THE KING'S SONS, BY GEORGE MANVILLE FENN.



CHAPTER ONE.

SONS OF THE KING.

The sun shone down hotly on the hill-side, and that hill was one of a
range of smooth rolling downs that ought to have been called ups and
downs, from the way they seemed to rise and fall like the sea on a fine
calm day.

Not quite, for at such a time the sea looks as blue as the sky above it,
while here on this particular hot day, though the sky was as blue as a
sapphire stone, the hills were of a beautiful soft green, the grass
being short and soft, and as velvety as if Nature had been all over it
regularly with her own particular mowing-machine.

But the only mowing that had been done to that grass was by the cropping
teeth of the many flocks of sheep whose fleeces dotted the downs with
soft white where they nibbled away, watched by the shepherds in their
long smock frocks with turn-down collars and pleatings and gatherings on
breast and back, and slit up at the sides from the bottom so as to give
the men's legs room to move freely when they ran after a restive sheep
to hook him with the long crook they carried and bring him kicking and
struggling by hook or by crook to the grass.

It was just over a thousand years ago, and, in spite of all the changes
fashion has made, plenty of shepherds and farm labourers still wear the
simple old Saxon dress then worn by King Ethelwulf's serfs, though
without the girdle worn then.

There were four boys on the steepest slope of that hill-side--four
fair-haired, sun-browned, hearty-looking boys--and they wore smock
frocks, belted in at the waist, of fine, soft, woollen material, woven
out of the fleeces of the sheep; for they were King's sons, the sons of
the King whose flocks were feeding on the hill-side in Berkshire, where
he had his Court.

It was as peaceful there as it was soft and beautiful; for though news
came from time to time of the cruel acts of the fierce Norsemen who had
come across the sea in their great row and sailing galleys full of
fighting-men, they were far away from the King's home, so that Queen
Osburga felt no anxiety about her boys being out on the downs at play,
enjoying themselves and growing strong.  This she loved to see; though,
being a very learned woman herself in days when noble people thought no
shame to have to say: "I cannot read or write," she sighed to find how
very little her four sons cared for such things as gave her delight.

They all loved to be out in the open air along with Cerda, the Saxon
jarl, one of the King's chief fighting-men, who urged them to learn how
to use the broadsword.  After setting one of the men to make swords for
the boys--not of hard cutting steel, but of good tough ash-wood--and
then matching them two against two, he would sit and roar with laughter
at the blows they gave and took.

"Well done!  At him again!" he cried.  "Another wound; but it will not
bleed."

It was Cerda, too, who had bows and arrows made for the boys, whilst
King Ethelwulf would look on, sometimes smiling and sometimes sighing,
for he cared nothing for these things.

"But we must have fighting-men, Swythe," he said, to a little plump,
rosy-looking monk in a long gown held tightly to his waist by a knotted
rope, which cut in a good way, for the monk was very fat.

"Oh, but fighting's bad, sir, very bad," said the monk, passing one of
his hands round and round over his shining, closely-shaven crown.

"Very bad," said King Ethelwulf.  "I hate it; but you know what the
Danes have done to so many of your holy house--killing, burning, and
carrying off everything that is good."

The monk screwed up his face, shook his head, and sighed, while the rosy
little man looked so droll that the King smiled.

"Look here, Swythe," he said, "suppose a horde of the savage wretches
came up here to plunder my pleasant home, what would you do?"

"Hah!" said the monk.  "I am a man of peace, sir; I should run away."

"And leave the Queen and my boys and me to be killed or taken
prisoners?"

"Hah!  No," said the monk.  "I couldn't do that.  I'm afraid I should
take the biggest staff I could lift--or a sword--or an axe--and--and if
either of the wretches tried to touch our good Queen or either of my
dear boys I should hit him as hard as ever I could."

"With the club?" said the King.

"No; I should strike him down with the axe, sir."

"But you might kill him, Swythe."

"And if I did, sir," said the little monk fiercely, "it would be a good
thing too; for these Norsemen are wicked pagans, come to kill and slay."

"You see, we must have fighting-men, Swythe," said the King; and then he
turned to the Queen, who was listening to what they said.

"Hah! yes, sir," said the monk, with a sigh.  "I suppose we must; and it
does my heart good to see how clever the young Princes are with sword
and bow; but they spend too much time learning to fight.  If they would
only spend half the time learning with me!"

"Yes, it would be good," said Queen Osburga sadly.

"But they don't," continued the monk.  "There's only young Alured--
Alfred, as you call him--who will learn at all, and he is nearly as idle
as his brothers."

"You cannot say that they are idle," said the Queen, smiling gently.

"Well, perhaps not idle, my daughter," said the monk, shaking his head,
"because they do work hard to learn what Jarl Cerda teaches them."

"Yes," said King Ethelwulf, "they are apt to learn how to fight; but you
must make them learned, as kings should be, so as to rule wisely and
well when the Danes have killed me and they are called upon to reign."

"The Danes never shall kill you, sir," cried the little monk fiercely,
"so long as I can stand in their way."

The little group now separated, for the King and Queen had many duties
to perform in connection with state affairs, and the little monk had to
prepare the lessons for the boys.

And that's how matters were on that bright sunny day when King
Ethelwulf's sons lay out on the steep hill-side--Bald, Bert, Red, and
Fred--four as crisp and tongue-tripping names as four bright Saxon
English boys could own, but each with the addition of Athel or Ethel
before, except the youngest, in whose name it shortened into Al; and
these were their titles, because each was a Prince.



CHAPTER TWO.

"BOYS WILL BE BOYS."

One of the boys' amusements had been for one to shoot an arrow as high
up as he could, and for his brothers to follow and try and hit the first
one sent.  Fine practice this in marksmanship, but unsatisfactory and
tiring after a few tries, for the arrows flew far, and this time they
had brought no young serfs' sons to retrieve the arrows, one of which
took a long time to find.

But it was found at last, just as the head of a man appeared above the
distant ridge; and the boys stopped to look, the head being followed by
the shoulders and breast of the man, while behind him there was a fringe
of something bright and shimmering in the sunshine.

The next minute the boys began to run, for they saw that the object
first seen was a mounted man, and what followed the heads of spears
borne by a party of quite a hundred men, whose leader had been seen
first owing to his being mounted upon an active little horse.

"Where's Cerda going?" shouted one of the boys.

"There's a fight somewhere," said another.

And the other two joined in, crying together:

"Let's go and see."

So, in a state of wild excitement and wonder that they had not heard the
news of danger before, the boys raced to head off the body of armed men,
the first up being greeted by the big bluff leader with a cheery shout.

"What now?  What now?" he cried.  "Have you boys come to tell us that we
are too late, and that the enemy are all slain?  Who was it found the
Norsemen's ship?"

"Then the Danes have landed?" cried the eldest boy excitedly.

"Yes," cried his brother.  "I knew that was it."

"Yes, that's it, boy," said the leader, dragging at his horse's head,
for the animal was impatient to go on.

"Where are they?" cried the youngest boy, with his cheeks flushing and
eyes sparkling.

"A day's journey away, my boy.  The people over Farringdon way have
asked for help, and the King sends me."

"That's right," cried the boy who had last spoken.  "We'll go with you."

The leader smiled and shook his head, and the band of fine-looking,
picked men indulged in a hearty laugh.

"What are you mocking and gibing at?" cried the youngest boy fiercely.
"Do you think that because I and my brothers are young we cannot fight?"

"Yes," cried the eldest brother; "we can shoot an arrow with any of you.
Pick out your four best men, Jarl Cerda, and we'll shoot against them."

"Yes," said another.  "You know we can shoot well."

"Do I not?" said the jarl; "for I taught you."

"Yes, yes; they can all shoot well," came in concert.

"Oh, yes, they can shoot," said the leader; "but I have no time to prove
it."

"Of course not," cried Alfred.  "Never mind that.  Lead on."

"I'm afraid we should never catch the Danes if you boys came," said the
jarl solemnly.

"Why?" cried Bald, the eldest.

"Yes, why shouldn't we?" cried Ethelred.

"Don't ask him," said Alfred, frowning.

"Why?"

"Look at his eyes and the corners of his mouth.  He's laughing at us."

The big jarl's shoulders began to shake, and his lids half-closed in his
mirth, while the eyes of all four boys flashed in their anger.

"Why, of course I'm laughing, my boys," he said; "but it's not out of a
desire to mock at you.  I know you, my brave little fellows, and I hope
to come back safe, and to see you all grow up to stark men who will deal
well with the Norsemen.  But you must wait a bit."

"No, no," cried Alfred.  "We can stand back and shoot."

"So can the Danes, my boy; and their arrows are sharp."

"But we can shoot sharper and quicker than they," said Ethelred.  "Oh,
do take us, Jarl Cerda."

"No, my boy," said the stout Saxon noble firmly; "I cannot take you.
The King stood by and picked out my men, and he said I was to take these
and no more.  Would you have me give pain to our good Queen Osburga by
breaking the King's commands?"

"No," said Alfred, with a quick, old-fashioned look.  "We cannot do
that, boys."

"Come, that's bravely spoken, Alfred, boy; I like that," said the jarl,
leaning down from his horse to pat the youngest boy on the shoulder.
"Look here, if I come back safely after beating the Danes I'll bring you
one of their winged helmets for a prize."

"You will?" cried Alfred.

"I promise you I will, my boy," cried the big Saxon noble, "and trophies
for your brothers too.--There, we must go on.  Good-bye, my brave boys.
Give them a shout, my lads."

The men waved sword and spear in the air as they marched off and Alfred
and his brothers stood watching them till the last twinkling spear had
disappeared in the distance, and then the boys turned away with a sigh.

"Oh, I wish I was a man!" said Alfred sadly.

"No use to wish," said the next brother.  "Here, let's go on down the
stream to get some fish."

The disappointment was soon forgotten, and the boys dashed off downhill
as hard as they could go, neither of them hearing a shout, nor seeing
the little monk come panting up, to stand gazing ruefully after them and
wiping the great drops of perspiration off his face and head.

"Oh, dear!" he said; "it's a fine thing to be young and strong, and--"

He paused for a few moments to look down at his plump proportions.

"--And light," he added sadly.  "I can't run as they do."

He stood perfectly still as he spoke, watching the deep crease in the
valley, whose bottom was hidden by clumps of willow and beds of reeds
with their dark purply waving blooms.

"I suppose I must go after them," he sighed.  "What can they want down
there?"

The little monk sighed again and then started off to follow the boys,
trying hard to walk slowly and steadily; but it was all in vain.  The
hill-side sloped very steeply to the broad bed of willows and reeds far
below, making the way very bad for so heavy and inactive a man.  Worse
still: walking over the short grass in the hot sun had made the bottoms
of the monk's sandals as slippery as glass, and so it was that before he
had gone far down the slope he began to talk to himself, at first
slowly--then quickly--then in a loud excited way--and lastly he uttered
a shout and a cry for help.

"Here," he said, at first, "I want to go down slowly.  It's too hot to
walk fast.  Steady!  Why, I am going faster!"

Then there was a minute's pause, and the monk cried excitedly:

"I don't want to run."  Then: "Oh, dear me, however am I to stop
myself?"  And directly after: "Oh, do stop me, somebody, or I shall be
broken all to bits."  And lastly: "Here, help, help, help!"

Then there was a loud crashing sound, some water flew up, the monk
uttered a final "Oh!" and lay perfectly still, listening, for all at
once a familiar voice cried:

"Oh, come here, quick!  A sheep has gone plosh into the pool."

Boys were as much boys then as they are now, for directly after these
words were uttered Alfred--the Little then--came hurrying as fast as the
water would let him wade--splash, splash, splash!--from where he and his
brothers had been busily making a dam across the little stream to turn
the rushing water aside into another channel so as to leave the
unfortunate trout helpless and ready for capture, and as soon as he
caught sight of his teacher lying perfectly still he burst into a fit of
hearty laughter.

"Come and look!  Come and look!" he shouted.

His brothers wanted no further telling, but came splashing up out of the
stream to the open shallow muddy bed where the reeds grew, and as soon
as they saw the monk's condition they began to indulge in a bare-legged
triumphal war-dance, shrieking with laughter the while.

"Bad boys; bad, thoughtless, wicked boys!" grunted Father Swythe; but he
lay perfectly still with arms and legs spread apart as far as they would
go.

"Why don't you stand up and walk out?" cried Fred, at last, taking
compassion on his tutor's awkward plight.

"Because I'm so heavy, boy: I should sink."

"Oh, no.  It isn't deep there.  I've often waded about there to look for
moorhens' nests."

"Yes, my boy; but you're young and light.  I'm very heavy."

"Yes," cried one of the others, in high delight; "there's an arrow depth
of water where you are, and quite a bow length of thick mud under that."

"Oh, dear!" groaned the monk; "don't laugh at me, my boys.  Can't you
help me out?"

"Yes, I'll get you out," cried Alfred, and he waded towards his
unfortunate tutor, trampling the reeds down with his bare feet, but
sinking in up to his knees at every step.

"Mind you don't get into a hole, Fred!" cried Bald.

"Mind the big luces!" shouted Bert.  "There's a monster lives among
those reeds."

"Oh, they all swam away when Father Swythe fell in," cried Red.  "You
have got to mind your toes.  The big eels are down amongst the mud."

The monk groaned at this, and raised his dripping hands above the water,
to grasp with each a handful of reeds.

"The eels will go deeper into the mud," said Alfred sturdily.  "Now
then, catch hold of my hands, and I'll pull you out."

The monk raised one hand very cautiously, and Alfred seized it tightly
and began to back, pulling with all his might; but he pulled in vain,
for he did not move his tutor an inch.

"Here, I know," cried Alfred.  "You two come and join hands and pull."

"I'm afraid I'm too heavy," said Father Swythe.

"I shan't help," said Bald maliciously.  "Let him stop where he is."

The monk groaned again, and the three boys outside the reeds laughed
with malicious glee.

"If we pull him out he'll only take us back and begin to teach us to
read."

"Yes, yes, yes," sighed Father Swythe; "I came to fetch you in.  The
Queen sent me."

"Then we won't help you," said Bert; laughing.  "Let's go and finish
getting our fish, and then go back.  When they ask where he is we'll
tell them, and then some of the shepherds can come with wattle hurdles
and get him out."

"Oh, dear!" groaned the monk.  "After all my teaching, for you boys to
be as bad as this!  Why, if you leave me I shall be drowned!"

"Oh, no," said Red merrily.  "You've only to keep holding your face up."

"Yes," said Bert; "and that will send your legs down till you'll be
standing up in the mud and water."

"And all the big flies and things will come and buzz about and settle on
your crown.  Come along, Fred, and finish the dam."

"If we finish the dam," said Alfred seriously, "all the water will run
in here and make it deeper."

"Well, then he can swim out.  You can swim, can't you?"

"No, no, no," said the monk sadly.  "I never learned."

"What a pity!" said Red, laughing.

"You ought to have learned to swim instead of learning so much Latin,"
cried Bert.

"There isn't time to learn everything, my boys," said the monk sadly.
"I'm obliged to try and teach you all: the King and Queen sent for me
that I might.  Please help me out."

"We're not going to," cried Bald.  "Come along, boys.  He ought to have
learned to swim."

Bald began to move away, and the monk groaned again.

"Come along, Fred," cried Bert, and the monk turned his head sidewise so
as to look piteously at the youngest boy.

"No, I'm not coming.  I'm going to stop and help Father Swythe."

"Hah!" sighed the monk, and he squeezed Alfred's hand.

"No, you're not," cried Bald fiercely; "you're coming with us.  Come
along.  He will not sink."

"I shan't come!" said Alfred sturdily.

"What?  Here, boys, let's fetch him out."

There was a rush made towards where the boy stood knee-deep, and he
snatched his hand free from the monk's grasp, turned half-round, stooped
a little, and as his eldest brother came wading in among the reeds he
scooped up the water and saluted him with a heavy shower right in the
face, drenching him so that he turned tail and hurried back, the other
two laughingly backing out of reach.

"Oh, you!" shouted.  Bald.  "Come out, or I'll hold you right under the
water till you can't breathe."

"Come along then," cried Alfred boldly, and he sent another shower of
water after his brother, wetting him behind now.  "You'll be just as wet
as I shall first."

"You come out!"

"I shan't!  You come here, if you dare!"

"Come and help me, boys," cried Bald; but the others only laughed.

"Come yourself, if you dare!  Father Swythe will help me, and we'll duck
you."

"Urrr!" growled Bald, stamping with rage.  Then: "Never mind, boys: let
them stop together.  Give him a Latin lesson, Father Swythe."

"You stop a moment, all three of you," cried Alfred sharply.  "You're
not going away to leave Father Swythe like this.  Go and fetch the big
fir-pole that we laid across to begin the dam.  If that's laid down here
Father Swythe can pull himself out."

"Fetch it yourself!" cried Bald angrily.  "We're not your serfs."

"I'm going to stop with Father Swythe," cried Alfred.

"Good boy! good boy!" whispered the monk.

"And look here," cried Alfred angrily: "it's cruel and wicked not to
help him, and if you don't go I shall tell mother, and father will have
you all punished severely."

"Tell, if you dare!" cried Bald, wringing out some of the water from the
front of his tunic-like gown.  "Come along, boys, and we'll get the fish
without him."

Bald started off back to the stream, and the others followed him, the
monk watching with piteous eyes till they were out of sight, when he
turned his doleful, wrinkled face to his young companion, to tell him
what he already knew.

"They're gone," he said sadly.

"Yes," said Alfred, laughing; "but only to fetch the fir-pole."

"Do you think so?" sighed the monk.

"Yes; they're afraid of my telling mother and making her angry.  She
doesn't like us to do cruel things: she'd tell us we were like the
Danes.  They'll come back soon with the pole, and then if you hold one
end we can pull the other and draw you out.  But I say, Father Swythe,
you're big and strong.  Don't you think if you were to try, you could
get out on to the grass?  Try and struggle out before they come back."

"But if I began to sink--"

"Then I should run and shout to the shepherds to come and pull you out."

"But I shouldn't like you to leave me to sink alone, my boy."

"It would be a long, long time before you were regularly mired," said
the boy.  "Now, you try!  Give me both hands."

Father Swythe did as he was told, and, while his young companion threw
himself back and dragged, the monk kicked and struggled bravely, and
with such good effect that, to the surprise of both, he glided slowly
through the reeds, and in less than a minute he sat up panting on the
short grass, with the water streaming from the front of his gown.

"That was very brave and nice of you, my boy," he said, as he rose to
his feet, "and I shall never forget it."

"Oh, it was easy enough!" said Fred, laughing.  "There, let's go over
the hill, and when the boys come back they'll begin poking the pole
about down among the reeds, and think we're both smothered.  No: here
they come.  Look, they're bringing the pole."

Surely enough they were; but the monk did not stop.  He began trudging
up hill through the hot sunshine so as to get back to take off his wet
cassock and put on an old one that was dry, Fred choosing to stay with
him and to talk about the bees and birds and flowers they passed, of
which the monk could talk in an interesting way, even though it was a
thousand years ago.

As for the three others, they threw down the pole as soon as they saw
that the monk was safe, and then followed at a distance to the big
castle-like house--the palace in which the King dwelt; but there was
very little reading that afternoon; for there was too much to say about
the fresh attack made by the Danes, who had come up the river and
landed, to ravage the country.  Ethelwulf, who was not a very warlike
King, was very anxious as to the result of the fight, and was busy
getting more men together by means of his jarls or chiefs, so as to go
to the help of those who had already set out.

In fact, instead of studying Latin and learning to write, the boys stood
about learning something of the art of war, and what was to be done to
defend their country when an invading enemy was ravaging the land.



CHAPTER THREE.

FRED IS LEFT BEHIND.

Time went on, and King Ethelwulf gathered and led off to the assistance
of Jarl Cerda all the fighting-men he could assemble, as a wounded
messenger had arrived from that noble, asking the King for more help,
for he was sore pressed by the enemy.

The Danes, he sent word, were in great force, and more and more of their
war-galleys kept coming up the river, the occupants slaying and
destroying wherever they landed.

It was an anxious time for Queen Osburga, whose eyes often looked red as
if she had been weeping, while her cheeks grew white and thin, and she
shut herself up a great deal, so that no one should see her.

The men-folk had nearly all departed from the place, and there was no
one to exercise authority, so, as soon as the four boys had recovered
from their disappointment at not being allowed to go with the little
army their father led, they began to look upon it as a free and jovial
time in which they could do whatever pleased them most, and this they
did to such an extent that poor Swythe's face became full of lines, and
after trying in vain to make his pupils continue their studies, and
putting up with a great amount of disobedience on their part, he began
to reproach them in his mild way.  He was one of the gentlest and most
amiable of men, but the wilfulness of the boys had at length compelled
him to protest.

"It seems so shocking," he said, rather piteously.  "I only beg and pray
of you all, now that the King is at the war and our dear lady the Queen
in such sorrow and trouble, to try your best to get on with your
lessons, so that the King may feel proud of his sons when he returns.
Ethelbald laughs and mocks at me; Ethelbert says he will not study;
Ethelred follows his example; and Alfred, of whom I expected better
things, has just told me he does not mind a bit what I say, and that he
will do just as he likes."

"And so he shall!" said Bald boldly.  "That is, he shall do as I like.
Father has gone to fight the Danes, and while he's away, as I am the
eldest, I shall act in his place, and shall expect everyone to obey me
as if I were King."

"Oh, no, no, no," cried Swythe, looking shocked.  "Our dear lady Osburga
is Queen, and everyone must obey her."

"Do not speak of that to me!" cried Ethelbald.  "She is only a woman,
and cannot manage the men.  Why, if father should be killed--"

"Which Heaven forbid!" cried Swythe, with a look of horror on his face.
"Oh, dear me, Ethelbald, what a thing for you to say!  Shocking, my dear
boy."

"I don't want him to be killed," cried Bald.  "Of course not.  But if he
should be killed I shall become King directly, and I shall order
everybody to do what I like, and no one will dare to say a word.  The
first thing I shall do," he continued, with a laugh, "will be to send
old Swythe away, so that there will be no more learning Latin, boys, and
no crabbing fingers up to hold tens."

The three brothers said something with a shout which in those days
answered to "Hooray!" and then Alfred, who had shouted the loudest,
being the youngest and ready to think brother Bald's words very brave
and fine, suddenly began to feel uncomfortable; for he had a certain
amount of fear of the monk his master, and felt a kind of shrinking from
rebelling against his authority.  He glanced sidewise at Father Swythe
and saw that his eyes glimmered in a peculiar way as if water was rising
in them.  Directly afterwards his heart felt a little sore, and a sense
of shame began to trouble him, for there was no mistake: Father Swythe's
eyes were wet and his voice sounded hoarse and strange as he said sadly:

"You would not send me away, Ethelbald?  I have always tried to do my
duty to the young sons of my lord the King and have tried to make them
grow into scholarly princes fit to rule the land."

"Bah!  We do not want to be scholarly!" cried Bald scornfully.  "We want
to learn to be brave soldiers, so that we can go forth and beat the
Danes."

"Yes," said the monk sadly; "but, my boys, the warrior who's a scholar
as well is more brave and noble and merciful, and his name is one that
lives longer in the land.  Ah, well, you have made me very sad.  I had
hoped that I had done something to make the sons of my dear lady the
Queen love me; but if they do not it would be better perhaps that I
should go back to my cell at the old abbey, where I could be happy with
my parchments and my pens."

The old monk sighed and turned away; he appeared to have received a
shock which had broken his heart.

The three elder boys were laughing and joking about the matter, and
suddenly Ethelbald cried out:

"Come along, boys!  Bows and arrows.  I saw a roebuck feeding outside
the oak wood.  Here, we'll take spears with us too to-day.  Let old
Swythe teach the swineherds' boys to read Latin instead of minding the
little pigs hunting for acorns."

"No spears left!" said Bert.

"The men took them all when they went away!" said Red.

"Then let's go without!" said Bald.

Alfred said nothing; he was watching the monk going slowly and sadly
away, and somehow the little figure did not look comic to him then, even
if it was short and plump and round.

"Where's Fred?" cried Bald the next minute, when the boys were getting
their bows and quivers.

His brothers could not tell him where Alfred was; so after a few moments
pause, Ethelbald said:

"Never mind: let's go without him.  Hers too young and weak to do what
we do.  Let him stay behind and learn Latin with old Swythe."

"He did go out after him," said Bert.

"Yes, I saw him.  I remember now," cried Red.

His last words were almost smothered by his eldest brother, who raised
to his lips a curling cow-horn tipped with a copper mouthpiece and
strengthened with a ring at the head end.  He proceeded to blow into it,
but failed to produce anything more huntsman-like than a kind of bray
such as might be uttered by a jackass suffering from a sore-throat.

But it was good enough to send all the dogs about the place frantic, and
away the three boys went, followed by a pack of hounds, some of which
would have been as ready to tackle wolf or boar as to dash after the
lordly stag or the big-eyed, prong-horned, graceful roes of which there
were many about the forest lands which surrounded the King's home.

Alfred, from one of the upper windows, saw them go away in triumph and
longed to join them; but he did not do so, for there was sorrow in his
heart, and for the first time in his young life he had begun to think
deeply about the words spoken by his brother and those uttered so sadly
and reproachfully by the simple-hearted, gentle monk.



CHAPTER FOUR.

A BEE IN HIS CELL.

It was in the afternoon of that same day that young Alfred loitered
about the place feeling very lonely and miserable and, truth to tell,
repentant because he had not joined his brothers in the glorious chase
they must be having.  Taken altogether, he felt very miserable.

But he was not alone in that, for, going to the window, he saw Father
Swythe walking slowly down the garden amongst the Queen's flower and
herb beds, with his head bowed down and his hands behind him, looking
unhappy in the extreme.

Alfred turned away, feeling guilty, and went into another room, when, to
his surprise, he came suddenly upon Osburga, his mother, seated alone by
her embroidery-frame, her needle and silk in her hands, but not at work.

She was sitting back thinking, with the tears slowly trickling down her
cheeks.

Alfred felt that this was a most miserable day, and, with his heart
feeling more sore than ever, he crept softly behind his mother's chair
and, quite unobserved, sank down upon his knees to lay his brown and
ruddy cheek against her hand.

The Queen started slightly, and then, raising her hand, she laid it upon
Alfred's fair, curly locks and began to smoothe them.

"Why are you crying, mother?" whispered the boy at last, as he felt that
he must say something, although he knew perfectly well the reason of his
mother's sorrow.

"I am crying, Fred," she said, in a deep sad voice, "because the days go
by and no messenger comes to tell me how the King your father fares; and
more tears came, my boy, because now that I am in such pain and sorrow I
find that my sons, instead of trying to be wise and thoughtful of their
duties, grow more wild and wilful every day."

Alfred drew a deep catching breath which was first cousin to a sob, and
the Queen went on:

"I want them to grow up wise and good, and I find that not only do they
think of nothing except their own selfish ends, but they behave ill to
one of the gentlest, kindest, and best of men--one who is as wise and
learned as he is modest and womanly at heart.  It makes mine sore, my
son, at such a time as this, for there is nothing better nor greater
than wisdom, my boy, and he who possesses it leads a double life whose
pleasures are without end.  But I am in no mood to scold and reproach
you, Fred.  You are the youngest and least to blame.  Still, I had
looked for better things of you all than that I should hear that you
openly defy Father Swythe, and have made him come to me to say that he
can do no more, and to ask to be dismissed.  There, Fred, leave me now.
I will talk to your brothers when they return from the chase."

Alfred's lips were apart, ready to utter words of repentance; but they
seemed to stick on the way, leaving him dumb.

Feeling more miserable than ever, he stole out, looking guilty and
wretched, and went straight into the garden for a reason of his own.

But it was not to pick flowers or to gather fruit.  He wanted to see the
gentle old monk; for he felt as if he could say to him what he could not
utter to the Queen.  But there was another disappointment awaiting him.
Swythe was not there, and the boy stamped his foot angrily.

"Oh," he said, half aloud and angrily, "how unlucky I am!"

Just then there came as if out of one of the low windows looking upon
the garden a deep-toned sound such as might have been made by a very big
and musical bee, and the boy's face brightened as he turned and made for
the door, crossed the hall, and then went down a stone passage, to stop
at a door, whose latch he lifted gently, and looked in, letting out at
once the full deep tones he had heard in the garden floating out of the
open window.

There was Swythe sitting at a low table beneath the window with his back
to him, singing a portion of a chant whose sweet deep tones seemed to
chain the boy to the spot, as he listened with a very pleasurable
sensation, and watched the monk busily turning a big flattened pebble
stone round and round as if grinding something black upon a square of
smoothly-polished slab.

Alfred watched eagerly, and his eyes wandered about the cell-like room
devoted to Swythe--a very plain and homely place, with a stool or two
and a large table beneath the window, while one side was taken up by the
simple pallet upon which the monk slept.

All at once the chanting ceased, the grinding came to an end, and, as if
conscious of someone being in the room, the monk turned his head, saw
Alfred watching him, and smiled sadly.

"Ah, my son," he said; "back from the chase so soon?"

"No," said Alfred huskily.  "I did not go."

"Not go?" said the monk, in surprise.  "How was that?  Ah!  I see," he
continued, for the boy was silent, "you and Ethelbald have quarrelled."

"No, indeed," cried Alfred, and then he stopped.  The monk went on
without looking, passing the pebble slowly round and round upon the
slab, grinding up what looked like thin glistening black paste.

"Then why did you stay behind?" said the monk gravely.

"Because--because--because--oh, don't ask me!" cried the boy
passionately.

Swythe fixed his eyes gently and kindly upon the boy, and left off
grinding.

"Tell me why, Fred, my son," he said softly.

"Because of what Bald said and what you said; and then I went in and saw
my mother, and she is so unhappy; and--and--"

Then, with a wild and passionate outburst, the boy made a dash at the
old man and caught him by the shoulder, as he cried:

"Oh, Father Swythe, I do want to learn to read and to write, and be what
you said.  Please forgive me and help me, and I will try so hard--so
very, very hard!"

"My son!" cried the monk, in a choking voice, and, as the boy was drawn
tightly to the old man's breast and he hid his face so that his tears
should not be seen, something fell pat upon the back of his head, making
him look up quickly, to see that he need not feel ashamed of his own,
for his tutor's tears were falling slowly, though there was a contented
look in the old man's face.

"Yes," he said, smiling, "you have made me cry, my boy; but it is
because you have made me happy.  You have taught me that I have touched
your young heart and opened the bright well-spring of the true and good
that is in your nature.  Fred, my boy," he continued, "you are too young
to know it, so I will tell you: my son, you have just done something
that is very brave and true."

"I?" cried the boy passionately, as he turned away his head.  "I have
behaved ill to you who have always been so kind and good, and made my
mother weep for me when she is in such dreadful trouble without."

"And then, my boy, you have come straight to me, your teacher--the poor,
weak, humble servant of his master, who has always striven to lead you
in the right way--and thrown yourself upon my breast and owned your
fault.  That is what I mean by saying you have done a very brave thing,
my boy.  There, and so you will try now?"

The last words came with a bright and cheerful ring, as Swythe released
the boy and sat back smiling at him and looking proudly into his eyes.

"And so you want to learn to read and write and grow into a wise man who
may some day rule over this land?"

"Oh, I want to learn!" cried the boy, dashing away his last tears.  "I
want to be wise and great; but oh, no: I don't want to rule and be King.
I want father to live till I am quite an old man."

"I hope he will!" said Swythe, smiling, and nodding his head pleasantly,
as the boy hurriedly turned the conversation by asking:

"What are you doing there?"

"Making some fresh ink, my boy," was the reply.

"Ink?  How?"

"Hah!" cried the monk, chuckling pleasantly; "now the vessel is opened
and eager for the knowledge to be poured in.  Question away, Fred, my
son, and mine shall be the task to pour the wisdom in--as far as I have
it," he added, with a sigh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Alfred stood at the great entrance late that afternoon when the loud
barking of the dogs told of the young hunters' return, and as soon as
they came in sight Red cried:

"There, I told you so; Fred's along with old Swythe."

For the monk was standing by the boy's side, waiting to see what success
the young hunters had achieved.

They looked to see their brother disappointed and ready to upbraid them
with going and leaving him behind; but they were surprised, for the boy
saluted them with:

"Well, where's the fat buck?"

"Oh," said Bald shortly, "we had a splendid run, but the dogs were so
stupid that he managed to get away.  But you ought to have been there:
it was grand."

"Was it?" said Alfred coolly.  The news did not seem to trouble him in
the least.  He noticed, though, that the three boys were so tired out
that not one of them seemed to care for his supper, and directly after
they went off to bed.



CHAPTER FIVE.

BEGINNING TO BE GREAT.

The boys had some fresh plan for the next day, and when Alfred went up
to bed they were all whispering eagerly; but as soon as their brother
entered the room they pretended to be asleep.

Alfred said nothing till he was undressed and about to get into his bed,
and then he only wished them good night.

There was no reply, and the boy felt hurt; but just then he recollected
something which made him clap his right hand first to his cheek and then
to his forehead, as if he fully expected to find both places still wet
and warm.  They felt still as if his mother's lips had but just left
them.

From that moment Alfred lay quite still in the darkness, feeling very
happy and contented, till all at once a long-drawn restful sigh escaped
his lips, and he was just dropping off to sleep when he awoke again and
lay listening, for his three brothers, believing that he had gone off to
sleep, began talking again in an eager whisper, but what about he could
not tell, till all at once Red said something about "otters."

They were going to have a grand otter hunt up the little Wantage stream
with the dogs; and for a few moments a feeling of bitter disappointment
came over the boy, for he had looked forward to the day when that hunt
would take place.

He felt better when he recalled the Queen's words as he wished her good
night.  They were:

"I am so glad, Fred, my boy.  You have made me feel very happy."

"Father Swythe must have told her what I said," thought Alfred, and in
another minute he was asleep.

The next morning after breakfast the boy did not feel half so brave, and
he was thinking of how he could get away to the monk's quiet cell-like
room without his brothers seeing him; but he was spared from all trouble
in that way, for the monk came up to him smiling.

"I'm going to speak to your brothers, Fred," he said.  "I told the Queen
that you had promised to try very hard, and she said she was very glad,
but she would be so much happier if your brothers came too; so I am
going to ask them to come.  Do you know where they are?"

"Out in the broad courtyard," said Alfred quickly; but Father Swythe
shook his head.

"No," he said; "I came across just now, and they were not there."

At that moment the distant barking of a dog was heard; followed by a
yelping chorus which made the boy run to the window and look out, to
catch sight of three figures and some half-dozen dogs disappearing over
the hill slope.

"I think they have gone after the otters with the dogs," said Alfred
sadly.

"Oh, I see," said the monk; "and you feel dull because you are not with
them?"

Alfred was too honest to deny it.

"Never mind, boy," said the little monk cheerily; "come to my room, and
we'll finish making the ink, and then you can learn to read the letters
as I make them, while I write out a poem for the Queen; and then I'll
get out the red and blue and yellow, and the thin leaves of gold, and
we'll try and make a beautiful big letter like those in the Queen's
book, and finish it off with some gold."

"But you can't do that?" cried Alfred, interested at once.

"Perhaps not so well as in the Queen's beautiful book; but come and
see."

The boy eagerly took hold of the monk's hand, and they were soon seated
at the little table in Swythe's room, with the light shining full upon
the slate slab, the pebble grinder, and the black patch.

"You said that was ink yesterday," said the boy, as Swythe gave the
pebble a few turns round, and then looked to see if the ink was of the
right thickness, which it was not, so a feather was dipped in a
water-jug, and a few drops allowed to fall upon the black patch.

"There," said Swythe, "a good writer makes all his own ink.  Now you
grind that up till it is well mixed.  Gently," cried Swythe; "that ink
is too precious to be spread all over the slab.  Grind it round and
round.  That's the way!  That will do!"

As he spoke, Swythe took a thin-bladed knife and a good-sized,
nicely-cleaned fresh-water mussel-shell, and let the boy carefully
scrape up all the ink from the slab and place it in the shell.

"That's well done!" he said.  "Now we'll write a line of letters."

"Yes," cried the boy; "let me write them."

"I wish you could, Fred, my boy," said the monk, smiling; "but you must
first learn."

"That's what I want to do," cried the boy eagerly.  "But how am I to
learn?"

"By watching me.  Now see."

Swythe rose from the table and opened a box, out of which he took a
crisp clean piece of nearly transparent sheepskin and a couple of quill
pens, sat down again, and then from another box he drew out a piece of
lead and a flat ruler--not a lead-pencil such as is now used, but a
little pointed piece of ordinary lead--with which he deftly made a few
straight lines across the parchment, and then very carefully drew a
beautiful capital A, which he finished off with scrolls and turns and
tiny vine-leaves with a running stalk and half-a-dozen tendrils.

"But you have put no grapes," cried Alfred.

"Give me time," said Swythe good-humouredly, and directly after he
faintly sketched in a bunch of grapes, broad at the top and growing
narrower till it ended in one grape alone.

"Oh, I wish I could do that!" cried Alfred eagerly.  "But I could never
do it so well!"

"I'm going to persevere till I make you do it better," said Swythe.
"Now we'll leave that for a bit and begin a Latin lesson."

Alfred sighed and looked longingly at the faint initial letter.

But his interest was taken up directly, for Swythe took up one of his
quill pens, examined it, and then, after giving the ink a stir, dipped
in his pen and tried it.

The next minute, while the boy sat resting his chin upon his hands, it
seemed as if beautifully-formed tiny letters kept on growing out of the
pen, running off at the point, and standing one after another in a row,
almost exactly the same size, till four words stood out clearly upon the
cream-coloured parchment.

As he formed the letters with his clever white fingers, Swythe repeated
the name of each, pausing a little to give finish and effect as well as
sound to the words he formed, till he had, after beginning some little
distance in, made so many words upon one of the faintly-drawn lines and
reaching right across the parchment.

"It's wonderful!" cried Alfred.  "I could never do that!"

"It is not wonderful, and you soon will be able to do it," said Swythe;
"but let's say all those words over again letter by letter, and then the
words."

"They are Latin?" asked the boy.

"Yes," said Swythe, "and you are going to learn them so as to know them
next time you see them."

Alfred shook his head, but he managed to repeat the Latin words
straightforward, and after a while pick them out when asked.  Then the
monk proceeded to get out his colours so as to ornament the big initial
letter of what Alfred had learned in Latin as well as in English was
"The History of the Good King Almon."

Then came the most interesting part of the lesson, for, after Swythe had
placed his colours ready--red, yellow, and blue--all in powders ground
up so fine that it was necessary to shut out the breeze which came in at
the window, Alfred learned how the monk made his brushes, by taking a
tuft of badger's hair and tying up one end carefully with a very fine
thread of flax.

"Now watch me," said the old man, and Alfred looked closely while Swythe
took a duck's quill out of a bunch, cut off the hollow part, and then
lightly cut off the end where it had grown from the duck's wing.  Then
the tuft of badger's hair was held by its tied end and passed through
the monk's lips so as to bring the hairs together to a point, which was
carefully pushed into the most open part of the quill and screwed round
till the whole of the tuft was inside.  Then a thrust with a thin piece
of wood sent the hairs right through, all but the tied-up ends; and
Swythe held his work up in triumph--a complete little paint-brush.

"How clever!" cried the boy eagerly; "but how did you get that badger's
hair?"

"Saved," said Swythe, "when the dogs killed that badger last year."

"And the ducks' quills?"

"I picked them up when the ducks were plucked by the scullion."

"You did not tell me how you made that black paint."

"By holding a piece of slate over the burning wick of the lamp till
there was plenty of soot to be scraped off and mixed up with gum water
made from plum-tree gum, the same as I am going to use to mix up these
colours, you see."

As he spoke Swythe took a clean mussel-shell and placed in it a tiny
portion of scarlet powder.

"That's a pretty colour!" said the boy.  "What is it?"

"The colour made by burning some quicksilver and brimstone together in a
very hot fire till it is red, and afterwards I grind it up into fine
dust.  Now," he said, "I'm going to mix this up with gum; and then we'll
paint all the back of the parchment behind the big letter red."

Alfred watched the monk's clever touches with the point of his little
brush till there was a great square patch upon which the letter seemed
to stand.

"Beautiful!" cried Alfred.  "Now it's done!"

"Oh, no," said Swythe; "that's the beginning!  Now we'll paint the
scroll."

"Why do you say _we_" said the boy.  "It is you."

"It's we, because you are helping me," said the monk.  "Very soon you
will be doing letters like this, and then I shall help you."

Alfred sighed.

"Are you going to paint that scroll red too?"

"No: purple," was the reply, and Swythe took up another little packet,
which he opened slowly.

"Why, that's blue," cried Alfred.

"Wait a moment!" said Swythe, taking up another clean mussel-shell, into
which he put a tiny patch of the bright blue dust.  "Now you shall see
it turn purple."

Taking up the brush, whose hairs were thickly covered with red paint, he
poured a few drops of gum water into the shell amongst the blue powder,
mixed all together with the red brush, and to the boy's great delight a
beautiful purple was the result.

Then the leaves that had been sketched in had to be done, and while the
boy wondered another shell was taken, the brush carefully washed, and a
little of the blue dust was mixed with some yellow, when there was a
brilliant green, which the monk made brighter or darker by adding more
yellow or more blue.

The big ornamental letter was now becoming very bright and gay, Alfred
looking upon it as finished; but Swythe went on.

"It's very wonderful!" said the boy.  "You seem as if you can make any
colours out of red, yellow, and blue."

"So will you soon!" said Swythe, smiling, and still painting away, till
at the end of a couple of hours, which seemed to have passed away like
magic, the monk began to carefully clean his brush with water.

"That's done now!" cried Alfred, with a sigh of as much sorrow as
pleasure, for he felt it to be a pity that the task was finished.  "But
do you know, Father Swythe," he continued, as he held his head on one
side and looked critically at the staring white letter with its
beautiful ornamentation, "I think if I could paint and painted that
letter I shouldn't have left it all white like that."

"What would you have done, then?"

"I should have painted it deep yellow like a buttercup--a good sunny
yellow, to look like gold."

"Well done!" cried the monk.  "Why, that's exactly what it is going to
be.  It isn't finished, but I'm not going to paint it yellow.  I'm going
to paint it red first."

"I don't think I shall like that," said the boy, shaking his head.

"Wait and see!" said the monk, and once more mixing up a little red with
gum he carefully painted the white letter scarlet, and held it up.

"There!" cried the boy triumphantly; "it looks now almost like the back
patch, and you've spoiled it all."

"Umph!" grunted the monk, re-opening the window and laying his work in
the sun to dry.  "Wait a bit."

"Yes, I'll wait," said the boy, watching the shiny wet paint turn more
and more dull; "but I don't like it."

Swythe washed his brush carefully again, and as soon as the paint was
dry went carefully over the letter part with gum, so delicately that the
red colour was not disturbed nor the background smeared.

"Yes," said the boy, still watching; "that looks a little better,
because it looks shiny, but it was better white.  Do paint it yellow
now."

"I told you I'm going to make it yellow," said Swythe, laying his work
well out in the sunshine to get thoroughly dry.

Then, taking it from the window-sill and shutting out the breeze again,
Swythe placed his work ready and took out, from a snug corner, a tiny
book made by sewing together about half-a-dozen leaves of parchment, and
upon opening this very carefully Alfred saw within a piece of brilliant
shining gold.

"Oh, how beautiful!" cried Alfred, making a dart at it with his hand.
But, as if he expected this, Swythe put out his own hand and caught his
pupil's just in time, creating such a breeze, though, that the very thin
gold leaf rose up at the corner and fell over, doubling nearly in half.

"There, you see how fine it is!" cried Swythe.

"I'm very sorry--I did not know," said the boy sadly; and then he looked
on in wonder, for the monk bent down, gave a gentle puff with his
breath, and the gold was blown up, to fall back into its place.

"Why, I thought it would be quite hard and heavy," said Alfred.

"And it's twenty times as thin as the parchment!" said Swythe.  "Now
then, suppose we make the letter of gold."

Alfred did not speak, but watched with breathless interest while the
monk took his knife and carefully cut a long strip off one edge of the
gold leaf, and then, dividing it in four, took it up bit by bit on the
blade, and laid the pieces along the letter, cutting off edges and
scraps that were not wanted, and covering up bare places so carefully
and with such great pains that at last there was not a trace left of the
gummed letter, a rough, rugged gold one being left in its place.

"There!" cried Swythe, when he had covered the last speck, and all was
gold leaf; but Alfred shook his head.

"It looks very beautiful," he said; "but I don't like it.  The edges are
all rugged and rough."

"So they are!" replied Swythe, and, taking now a clean dry brush, he
began to smoothe and dab and press gently till there was not a trace
left of where the scraps of gold joined or lay one over the other, all
becoming strong and perfect excepting the edges, where the gold lay
loose, till, quite satisfied with his work, the monk passed his brush
briskly over the letter, carrying off every scrap of gold outside the
gummed letter, and leaving this clean, smooth, and glistening.

"Oh, Father Swythe," cried Alfred, clapping his hands, "you are clever!
It's beautiful!"

"You like it, then, my boy?" said the old man gravely.  "You shall soon
be able to do that with your light fingers."

The boy looked down at his hands and then took up the pen the monk had
laid down, dipped it in the ink, and tried to make a letter.

"Well done," said Swythe, smiling; "that is something like O.  Now make
another, and try if you can make it worse than the last."

The boy looked up at him sharply.

"You are laughing at me!" he said.

"Well, if I am, it is only to make you try and do better.  Go on again!"

The boy hesitated before looking hard at the letter he had tried to
imitate, and then tried once more.

"Ever so much better!" cried the monk.  "Come to me every day, and try
like that, and in a very short time you will be able to read and write."



CHAPTER SIX.

THE GREAT WHITE HORSE.

Encouraged by these words of the monk and the smiles and praises of the
Queen, Alfred made rapid progress, which, oddly enough, grew quicker
still from the way in which Bald and his brothers ridiculed him and
laughed at his attempts, for their gibes angered him, but only made him
work the harder, and with results which Swythe told the Queen were
wonderful.  Six long weary weeks had passed away since Ethelwulf had
gone with his little army against the Danes, and only once had news been
received, so that Queen Osburga's face grew whiter, thinner, and more
sad day by day, till one evening when, after a long hard day's work with
the monk, the pair went up to the top of the highest hill near to watch
for the appearance of a messenger.  Swythe could see no sign of
anything.

"There is no news," he said sadly.  "Let us go back.  The Queen is
waiting to hear what we have found."

"There is news," cried the boy excitedly.  "I can see the points of
spears right away there in the valley.  Look, the sun shines upon them
and makes them glitter."

"Yes, I see now," cried Swythe excitedly.  "Quick, let's try and run,
boy.  The Danes!  The Danes!  We must get the Queen away into the woods
so as to be safe."

"Why not stop in the big house, and shut up every window and door?  We
must fight.  You can fight, Father Swythe?"

"I, my boy?" said the monk sadly.  "Yes, with my tongue.  No, I am only
a man of peace.  All we can do is to fly for our lives.  There are not
twenty strong fighting-men, Fred, my son, and those who are coming
against us must, from the spears and shining iron caps with wings like
the Norsemen wear, be quite a thousand.  Quick!  You can go faster than
I.  Run on first and warn the good Queen that it is time to fly!"

Alfred nodded his head quickly and started off to run; but at that
moment it struck him that it would be foolish to run and give the alarm
without being sure.  The monk had declared the force to be the enemy,
but the boy wished to see for himself, and, darting sidewise, he ran
down the hill, bearing to his right, till by stooping he could keep
under cover of the gorse-bushes and approach quite near to the coming
army.

It was a daring thing to do, for it might have ended in being made a
prisoner without the chance of giving the alarm; but the brave act
turned out to be quite wise, for when at last the boy had drawn near to
the great body of armed men and crouched lower till he found a place
through which he could peer cautiously, he sprang to his feet with a
shout of joy.

For there in front rode his father, King Ethelwulf, mounted upon a
sturdy horse, but so changed that he hardly knew him, for he was wearing
a Danish helmet ornamented with a pair of grey gull's wings, half-opened
and pointed back, while in his left hand he carried a Danish shield
painted with a black raven, and in his right was a shining double
battle-axe.

Alfred's cry was answered by a shout from the men, and Ethelwulf rode
forward to meet his son, who grasped his extended hands and sprang up to
sit in front of him upon the horse.

"Your mother--Osburga?" said the King hoarsely.

"Ill, father, because you do not come," cried the boy excitedly.

"Hah!  Then she will soon be well," said the King, with a sigh of
content.  "Yonder is plump little Swythe coming to welcome me, I see,"
he continued; "but where are your brothers?"

"I don't know, father," replied the boy, innocently enough.  "They have
not come back from hunting, I think."

King Ethelwulf frowned, but said no more then, contenting himself with
pressing forward to give his hand to Swythe, who had followed the boy as
soon as he saw him change his course; and soon after the King's heart
was gladdened by seeing Osburga with her train of women and serfs coming
to meet them, answering the Saxon soldiers' cheers.  But Bald, Bert, and
Red had even then not come back from the chase.

That night the King told of the great victory which he had at last
gained over the Danish invaders, who had been defeated with great
slaughter near Farringdon, and it was in memory of that victory that the
King returned to the battlefield with his men on a peaceful errand, and
that was to use the spade instead of the battle-axe and sword, while
they cut down through the green turf on one hill-side, right down to the
clean, white, glistening chalk, after the lines had been marked out and
the shape cleverly designed, working for weeks and weeks till there, on
the slope they had carved out a huge white horse over a hundred yards in
length--the Great White Horse of the Berkshire downs, which has remained
as if galloping along until this day.

Year after year the scouring of that horse, as it is called, takes
place, when men go and clear out the brown earth that has crumbled
through frost and rain into the ditch-like lines which mark the horse's
shape on the green hill-side, and make it stand out white and clear as
ever.

No one will think it strange after what has been told that the youngest
of those four boys grew up under Swythe's teaching wise and learned, and
as brave as, or braver than, either of his three brothers, who, when at
last King Ethelwulf died, succeeded in turn to be King of England.  They
each sat on the throne--Ethelbald, Ethelbert, and Ethelred; but their
reigns were short, for in twenty years they too had passed away, to be
succeeded by the strong, brave, and learned man who drove the Danish'
invaders finally from the shores of England, or forced them to become
peaceful workers of the soil.  He was the brave warrior who never knew
what it was to be conquered, but tried again and again till the enemy
fled before him and his gallant men.

Old chronicles tell many stories of his deeds--stories that have grown
old and old--and they tell too that the studious boy's teacher Swythe
became Bishop of Winchester and was called a saint, while old writers
have worked up a legend about the rain christening the apples on Saint
Swithin's Day, and when it does, keeping on sprinkling them for forty
days more; but, like many other stories, that one is not at all true, as
any young reader may find out by watching the weather year by year.

But that does not matter to us, who have to deal with Alfred the Little,
and who willingly agree that as he grew up he was worthily given the
name of Alfred the Great.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The King's Sons, by George Manville Fenn

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KING'S SONS ***

***** This file should be named 21315.txt or 21315.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/3/1/21315/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
