Project Gutenberg's James Braithwaite, the Supercargo, by W.H.G. Kingston

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: James Braithwaite, the Supercargo
       The Story of his Adventures Ashore and Afloat

Author: W.H.G. Kingston

Illustrator: T.C. Dugdale

Release Date: May 8, 2007 [EBook #21386]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JAMES BRAITHWAITE, THE SUPERCARGO ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




James Braithwaite, the Supercargo; The Story of his Adventures Ashore
and Afloat, by W.H.G. Kingston.

________________________________________________________________________

This is a typical Kingston book, very skilfully written, with lots of
difficult situations very well described.  But what is worth remembering
is that it is probably the last book Kingston ever wrote, for he had
already been diagnosed with a rapid and terminal illness, which I
suppose to have been cancer.  Yet, despite the position that redoubtable
author found himself in, he still gave us one of his very best
well-written adventure stories.

A supercargo is a position in the ship's crew analogous to the ship's
clerk.  His work consists of knowing exactly where every item of the
cargo is stowed, so that it can be put in the right place for it to be
most conveniently taken out on its arrival at its destination.

Do read it and judge for yourself.  You will find it worth the short
seven hours it takes to read aloud.

________________________________________________________________________

JAMES BRAITHWAITE, THE SUPERCARGO; THE STORY OF HIS ADVENTURES ASHORE
AND AFLOAT, BY W.H.G. KINGSTON.



CHAPTER ONE.

IN SEARCH OF THE "BARBARA."

"What's the name of the craft you want to get aboard, sir?" asked old
Bob, the one-legged boatman, whose wherry I had hired to carry me out to
Spithead.

"The _Barbara_," I answered, trying to look more at my ease than I felt;
for the old fellow, besides having but one leg, had a black patch over
the place where his right eye should have been, while his left arm was
partially crippled; and his crew consisted of a mite of a boy whose
activity and intelligence could scarcely make up for his want of size
and strength.  The ebb tide, too, was making strong out of Portsmouth
Harbour, and a fresh breeze was blowing in, creating a tumbling,
bubbling sea at the mouth; and vessels and boats of all sizes and rigs
were dashing here and there, madly and without purpose it seemed to me,
but at all events very likely to run down the low narrow craft in which
I had ventured to embark.  Now and then a man-of-war's boat, with
half-a-dozen reckless midshipmen in her, who looked as if they would not
have the slightest scruple in sailing over us, would pass within a few
inches of the wherry; now a ship's launch with a party of marines,
pulling with uncertain strokes like a huge maimed centipede, would come
right across our course and receive old Bob's no very complimentary
remarks; next a boatful of men-of-war's men, liberty men returning from
leave.  There was no use saying anything to them, for there wasn't one,
old Bob informed me, but what was "three sheets in the wind," or "half
seas over,"--in other words, very drunk; still, they managed to find
their way and not to upset themselves, in a manner which surprised me.
Scarcely were we clear of them when several lumbering dockyard lighters
would come dashing by, going out with stores or powder to the fleet at
Spithead.

Those were indeed busy times.  Numerous ships of war were fitting out
alongside the quays, their huge yards being swayed up, and guns and
stores hoisted on board, gruff shouts, and cries, and whistles, and
other strange sounds proceeding from them as we passed near.  Others lay
in the middle of the harbour ready for sea, but waiting for their crews
to be collected by the press-gangs on shore, and to be made up with
captured smugglers, liberated gaol-birds, and broken-down persons from
every grade of society.  Altogether, what with transports, merchantmen,
lighters, and other craft, it was no easy matter to beat out without
getting athwart hawse of those at anchor, or being run down by the still
greater number of small craft under way.  Still it was an animated and
exciting scene, and all told of active warfare.

On shore the bustle was yet more apparent.  Everybody was in movement.
Yellow post-chaises conveying young captains of dashing frigates, or
admirals' private secretaries, came whirling through the streets as if
the fate of the nation depended on their speed.  Officers of all grades,
from post-captains with glittering epaulets to midshipmen with white
patches on their collars and simple cockades in their hats, were
hurrying, with looks of importance, through the streets.  Large placards
were everywhere posted up announcing the names of the ships requiring
men, and the advantages to be obtained by joining them: plenty of prize
money and abundance of fighting, with consequent speedy promotion; while
first lieutenants, and a choice band of old hands, were near by to win
by persuasion those who were protected from being pressed.  Jack tars,
many with pig-tails, and earrings in their ears, were rolling about the
streets, their wives or sweethearts hanging at their elbows, dressed in
the brightest of colours, huge bonnets decked with flaunting ribbons on
their heads, and glittering brass chains, and other ornaments of glass,
on their necks and arms.  As I drove down the High Street I had met a
crowd surrounding a ship's gig on wheels.  Some fifty seamen or more
were dragging it along at a rapid rate, leaping and careering, laughing
and cheering.  In the stern sheets sat a well-known eccentric
post-captain with the yoke lines in his hands, while he kept bending
forward to give the time to his crew, who were arranged before him with
oars outstretched, making believe to row, and grinning all the time in
high glee from ear to ear.  It was said that he was on his way to the
Admiralty in London, the Lords Commissioners having for some
irregularity prohibited him from leaving his ship except in his gig on
duty.  Whether he ever got to London I do not know.

On arriving at Portsmouth, I had gone to the Blue Posts, an inn of old
renown, recommended by my brother Harry, who was then a midshipman, and
who had lately sailed for the East India station.  It was an inn more
patronised by midshipmen and young lieutenants than by post-captains and
admirals.  I had there expected to meet Captain Hassall, the commander
of the _Barbara_, but was told that, as he was the master of a
merchantman, he was more likely to have gone to the Keppel's Head, at
Portsea.  Thither I repaired, and found a note from him telling me to
come off at once, and saying that he had had to return on board in a
hurry, as he found that several of his men had no protection, and were
very likely to be pressed, one man having already been taken by a
press-gang, and that he was certain to inform against the others.  Thus
it was that I came to embark at the Common Hard at Portsea, and had to
beat down the harbour.

"Do you think as how you'd know your ship when you sees her, sir?" asked
old Bob, with a twinkle in his one eye, for he had discovered my very
limited amount of nautical knowledge, I suspect.  "It will be a tough
job to find her, you see, among so many."

Now I had been on board very often as she lay alongside the quay in the
Thames.  I had seen all her cargo stowed, knew every bale and package
and case; I had attended to the fitting-up of my own cabin, and was
indeed intimately acquainted with every part of her interior.  But her
outside--that was a very different matter, I began to suspect.  I saw
floating on the sea, far out in the distance, the misty outlines of a
hundred or more big ships; indeed, the whole space between Portsmouth
and the little fishing village of Ryde seemed covered with shipping, and
my heart sank within me at the thought of having to pick out the
_Barbara_ among them.

The evening was drawing on, and the weather did not look pleasant; still
I must make the attempt.  The convoy was expected to sail immediately,
and the interests of my employers, Garrard, Janrin and Company, would be
sacrificed should the sailing of the ship be delayed by my neglect.
These thoughts passed rapidly through my mind and made me reply boldly,
"We must go on, at all events.  Time enough to find her out when we get
there."

We were at that time near the mouth of the harbour, with Haslar Hospital
seen over a low sandbank, and some odd-looking sea-marks on one side,
and Southsea beach and the fortifications of Portsmouth, with a church
tower and the houses of the town beyond.  A line of redoubts and
Southsea Castle appeared, extending farther southward, while the smooth
chalk-formed heights of Portsdown rose in the distance.  As a person
suddenly deprived of sight recollects with especial clearness the last
objects he has beheld, so this scene was indelibly impressed on my mind,
as it was the last near view I was destined to have of old England for
many a long day.  For the same reason I took a greater interest in old
Bob and his boy Jerry than I might otherwise have done.  They formed the
last human link of the chain which connected me with my native land.
Bob had agreed to take my letters back, announcing my safe arrival on
board--that is to say, should I ever get there.  My firm reply, added to
the promise of another five shillings for the trouble he might have,
raised me again in his opinion, and he became very communicative.

We tacked close to a buoy off Southsea beach.  "Ay, sir, there was a
pretty blaze just here not many years ago," he remarked.  "Now I mind it
was in '95--that's the year my poor girl Betty died--the mother of Jerry
there.  You've heard talk of the _Boyne_--a fine ship she was, of
ninety-eight guns.  While she, with the rest of the fleet, was at anchor
at Spithead, one morning a fire broke out in the admiral's cabin, and
though officers and men did their best to extinguish it, somehow or
other it got the upper hand of them all; but the boats from the other
ships took most of them off, though some ten poor fellows perished, they
say.  One bad part of the business was, that the guns were all loaded
and shotted, and as the fire got to them they went off, some of the
shots reaching Stokes Bay, out there beyond Haslar, and others falling
among the shipping.  Two poor fellows aboard the _Queen Charlotte_ were
killed, and another wounded, though she and the other ships got under
way to escape mischief.  At about half-past one she burnt from her
cables, and came slowly drifting in here till she took the ground.  She
burnt on till near six in the morning, when the fire reached the
magazine, and up she blew with an awful explosion.  We knew well enough
that the moment would come, and it was a curious feeling we had waiting
for it.  Up went the blazing masts and beams and planks, and came
scattering down far and wide, hissing into the water; and when we looked
again after all was over, not a timber was to be seen."

Bob also pointed out the spot where nearly a century before the _Edgar_
had blown up, and every soul in her had perished, and also where the
_Royal George_ and the brave Admiral Kempenfeldt, with eight hundred
men, had gone down several years before the destruction of the _Boyne_.
"Ay, sir, to my mind it's sad to think that the sea should swallow up so
many fine fellows as she does every year, and yet we couldn't very well
do without her, so I suppose it's all right.  Mind your head-sheets,
Jerry, or she'll not come about in this bobble," he observed, as we were
about to tack round the buoy.

Having kept well to the eastward, we were now laying up to windward of
the fleet.  There were line-of-battle ships, and frigates, and
corvettes, and huge Indiamen as big-looking as many line-of-battle
ships, and large transports, and numberless merchantmen--ships and
barques, and brigs and schooners; but as to what the _Barbara_ was like
I had not an idea.  I fixed on one of the largest of the Indiamen, but
when I told old Bob the tonnage of the _Barbara_ he laughed, and said
she wasn't half the size of the ship I pointed out.

It was getting darkish and coming on to blow pretty fresh, and how to
find my ship among the hundred or more at anchor I could not possibly
tell.

"Well, I thought from your look and the way you hailed me that you was a
sea-faring gentleman, and on course you'd ha' known your own ship," said
old Bob, with a wink of his one eye.  "Howsomever, we can beat about
among the fleet till it's dark, and then back to Portsmouth; and then,
do ye see, sir, we can come out to-morrow morning by daylight and try
again.  Maybe we shall have better luck.  The convoy is sure not to sail
in the night, and the tide won't serve till ten o'clock at earliest."

"This comes of dressing in nautical style, and assuming airs foreign to
me," I thought to myself, though I could not help fancying that there
was some quiet irony in the old man's tone.  His plan did not at all
suit my notions.  I was already beginning to feel very uncomfortable,
bobbing and tossing about among the ships; and I expected to be
completely upset, unless I could speedily put my foot on something more
stable than the cockleshell, or rather bean-pod, of a boat in which I
sat.  I began to be conscious, indeed, that I must be looking like
anything but "a sea-faring gentleman."

"But we _must_ find her," I exclaimed, with some little impetuosity; "it
will never do to be going back, and I know she's here."

"So the old woman said as was looking for her needle in the bundle of
hay," observed old Bob, with provoking placidity.  "On course she is,
and we is looking for her: but it's quite a different thing whether we
finds her or not, 'specially when it gets dark; and if, as I suspects,
it comes on to blow freshish there'll be a pretty bobble of a sea here
at the turn of the tide.  To be sure, we may stand over to Ryde and haul
the boat up there for the night.  There's a pretty decentish public on
the beach, the Pilot's Home, where you may get a bed, and Jerry and I
always sleeps under the wherry.  That's the only other thing for you to
do, sir, that I sees on."

Though very unwilling to forego the comforts of my cabin and the society
of Captain Hassall, I agreed to old Bob's proposal, provided the
_Barbara_ was not soon to be found.  We sailed about among the fleet for
some time, hailing one ship after another, but mine could not be found.
I began to suspect at last that old Bob did not wish to find her, but
had his eye on another day's work, and pay in proportion, as he might
certainly consider that he had me in his power, and could demand what he
chose.  I was on the point of giving up the search, when, as we were
near one of the large Indiamen I have mentioned, a vessel running past
compelled us to go close alongside.  An officer was standing on the
accommodation-ladder, assisting up some passengers.  He hailed one of
the people in the boat, about some luggage.  I knew the voice, and,
looking more narrowly, I recognised, I thought, my old schoolfellow,
Jack Newall.  I called him by name.  "Who's that?" he exclaimed.  "What,
Braithwaite, my fine fellow, what brings you out here?"

When I told him, "It is ten chances to one that you pick her out
to-night," he answered.  "But come aboard; I can find you a berth, and
to-morrow morning you can continue your search.  Depend on it your ship
forms one of our convoy, so that she will not sail without you."

I was too glad to accept Jack Newall's offer.  Old Bob looked rather
disappointed at finding me snatched from his grasp, and volunteered to
come back early in the morning, and take me on board the _Barbara_,
promising in the meantime to find her out.

The sudden change from the little boat tumbling about in the dark to the
Indiaman's well-lighted cuddy, glittering with plate and glass, into
which my friend introduced me--filled, moreover, as it was, with
well-dressed ladies and gentlemen--was very startling.  She was the
well-known _Cuffnells_, a ship of twelve hundred tons, one of the finest
of her class, and, curiously enough, was the very one which, two voyages
before, had carried my brother Frederick out to India.

I had never before been on board an Indiaman.  Everything about her
seemed grand and ponderous, and gave me the idea of strength and
stability.  If she was to meet with any disaster, it would not be for
want of being well found.  The captain remembered my brother, and was
very civil to me; and several other people knew my family, so that I
spent a most pleasant evening on board, in the society of the nabobs and
military officers, and the ladies who had husbands and those who had
not, but fully expected to get them at the end of the voyage, and the
young cadets and writers, and others who usually formed the complement
of an Indiaman's passengers in those days.  Everything seemed done in
princely style on board her.  She had a crew of a hundred men, a
captain, and four officers, mates, a surgeon, and purser; besides
midshipmen, a boatswain, carpenter, and other petty officers.  I was
invited to come on board whenever there was an opportunity during the
voyage.

"We are not cramped, you see," observed Newall, casting his eye over the
spacious decks, "so you will not crowd us; and if you cannot bring us
news, we can exchange ideas."

True to his word, old Bob came alongside the next morning, and told me
that he had found out the _Barbara_, and would put me on board in good
time for breakfast.

I found Captain Hassall very anxious at my non-appearance, and on the
point of sending the second officer on shore to look for me, as it was
expected that the convoy would sail at noon; indeed, the _Active_
frigate, which was to convoy us, had Blue Peter flying at her mast-head,
as had all the merchantmen.

"You'd have time to take a cruise about the fleet, and I'll spin you no
end of yarns if you like to come, sir," said old Bob, with a twinkle in
his eye, as his wherry was see-sawing alongside in a manner most
uncomfortable to a landsman.

"No, thank you, Bob; I must hear the end of your yarns when I come back
again to old England; I'll not forget you, depend on it."

Captain Hassall had not recovered his equanimity of temper, which had
been sorely ruffled at having had two of his best men taken off by a
press-gang.  He had arrived on board in time to save two more who would
otherwise also have been taken.  He inveighed strongly against the
system, and declared that if it was continued he would give up England
and go over to the United States.  It certainly created a very bad
feeling both among officers and men in the merchant service.  While we
were talking, the frigate which was to convoy us loosed her topsails and
fired a gun, followed soon after by another, as a signal to way.  The
merchantmen at once began to make sail, not so quick an operation as on
board the man-of-war.  The pipe played cheerily, round went the capstan,
and in short time we, with fully fifty other vessels, many of them
first-class Indiamen, with a fair breeze, were standing down Channel;
the sky bright, the sea blue, while their white sails, towering upwards
to the heavens, shone in the sunbeams like pillars of snow.

The _Barbara_ proved herself a fast sailer, and could easily keep up
with our _Active_ protector, which kept sailing round the
majestic-looking but slow-moving Indiamen, as if to urge them on, as the
shepherd's dog does his flock.  We hove-to off Falmouth, that other
vessels might join company.  Altogether, we formed a numerous convoy--
some bound to the Cape of Good Hope, others to different parts of
India--two or three to our lately-established settlements in New South
Wales, and several more to China.

I will not dwell on my feelings as we took our departure from the land,
the Lizard lights bearing north half east.  I had a good many friends to
care for me, and one for whom I had more than friendship.  We had
magnificent weather and plenty of time to get the ship into order;
indeed I, with others who had never been to sea, began to entertain the
notion that we were to glide on as smoothly as we were then doing during
the whole voyage.  We were to be disagreeably undeceived.  A gale sprang
up with little warning about midnight, and hove us almost on our
beam-ends; and though we righted with the loss only of a spar or two, we
were tumbled about in a manner subversive of all comfort, to say the
least of it.

When morning broke, the hitherto trim and well-behaved fleet were
scattered in all directions, and several within sight received some
damage or other.  The wind fell as quickly as it had risen, and during
the day the vessels kept returning to their proper stations in the
convoy.  When night came on several were still absent, but were seen
approaching in the distance.  Our third mate had been aloft for some
time, and when he came into the cabin he remarked that he had counted
more sail in the horizon than there were missing vessels.  Some of the
party were inclined to laugh at him, and inquired what sort of craft he
supposed they were, phantom ships or enemy's cruisers.

"I'll tell you what, gentlemen,--I think that they are very probably the
latter," said the captain.  "I have known strange things happen; vessels
cut out at night from the midst of a large convoy, others pillaged and
the crews and passengers murdered, thrown overboard, or carried off.  We
shall be on our guard, and have our guns loaded, and if any gentry of
this sort attempt to play their tricks on us they will find that they
have caught a tartar."



CHAPTER TWO.

THE FIGHT.

I may as well here give an account of the _Barbara_, and how I came to
be on board her.  Deprived of my father, who was killed in battle just
as I was going up to the University, and left with very limited means, I
was offered a situation as clerk in the counting-house of a distant
relative, Mr Janrin.  I had no disinclination to mercantile pursuits.
I looked on them, if carried out in a proper spirit, as worthy of a man
of intellect, and I therefore gladly accepted the offer.  As my mother
lived in the country, my kind cousin invited me to come and reside with
him, an advantage I highly appreciated.  Everything was conducted in his
house with clock-work regularity.  If the weather was rainy, his coach
drew up to the door at the exact hour; if the weather was fine, the
servant stood ready with his master's spencer, and hat, and gloves, and
gold-headed cane, without which Mr Janrin never went abroad.  Not that
he required it to support his steps, but it was the mark of a gentleman.
It had superseded the sword which he had worn in his youth.  I soon got
to like these regular ways, and found them far pleasanter than the
irregularity of some houses where I had visited.  I always accompanied
Mr Janrin when he walked, and derived great benefit from his
conversation, and though he offered me a seat in the coach in bad
weather, I saw that he was better pleased when I went on foot.  "Young
men require exercise, and should not pamper themselves," he observed;
"but, James, I say, put a dry pair of shoes in your pocket--therein is
wisdom; and don't sit in your wet ones all day."

Thus it will be seen that I was treated by my worthy principal from the
first as a relative, and a true friend he was to me.  But I was
introduced into the mysteries of mercantile affairs by Mr Gregory
Thursby, the head clerk.  He lived over the counting-house, and on my
first appearance in it, before any of the other clerks had arrived, he
was there to receive me.  He took me round to the different desks, and
explained the business transacted at each of them.  "And there, Mr
James, look there," he said, pointing to a line of ponderous folios on a
shelf within easy distance of where he himself sat: "see, we have
Swift's works, a handsome edition too, eh!" and he chuckled as he spoke.

"Why, I fancied that they were ledgers," said I.  "Ha! ha! ha! so they
are, and yet Swift's works, for all that, those of my worthy
predecessor, Jeremiah Swift, every line in them written by his own hand,
in his best style; so I call them Swift's works.  You are not the first
person by a great many I have taken in.  Ha! ha! ha!"

This was one of the worthy man's harmless conceits.  He never lost an
opportunity of indulging in the joke to his own amusement; and I
remarked that he laughed as heartily the last time he uttered it as the
first.

I set to work diligently at once on the tasks given me, and was rewarded
by the approving remarks of Mr Janrin and Mr Thursby.  Mr Garrard had
long ago left, not only the business but this world; the "Co." was his
nephew, Mr Luttridge, who was absent on account of ill-health, and thus
the whole weight of the business rested on the shoulders of Mr Janrin.
But, as Thursby remarked, "He can well support it, Mr James.  He's an
Atlas.  It's my belief that he would manage the financial affairs of
this kingdom better than any Chancellor of the Exchequer, or other
minister of State, past or present; and that had he been at the head of
affairs we should not have lost our North American Colonies, or have got
plunged over head and ears in debt as we are, alack! already; and now,
with war raging and all the world in arms against us, getting deeper and
deeper into the mire."  Without holding my worthy principal in such deep
admiration as our head clerk evidently did, I had a most sincere regard
and respect for him.

Our dinner hour was at one o'clock, in a room over the office.  Mr
Janrin himself presided, and all the clerks, from the highest to the
lowest, sat at the board.  Here, however, on certain occasions, handsome
dinners were given at a more fashionable hour to any friends or
correspondents of the house who might be in London.  Mr Thursby took
the foot of the table, and I was always expected to be present.  At
length I completed two years of servitude in the house, and by that time
was thoroughly up to all the details of business.  I had been very
diligent.  I had never taken a holiday, and never had cause to absent
myself from business on account of ill-health.  On the very day I speak
of we had one of the dinners mentioned.  The guests were chiefly
merchants or planters from the West Indies, with a foreign consul or
two, and generally a few masters of merchantmen.  The guests as they
arrived were announced by Mr Janrin's own servant, Peter Klopps, who
always waited on these occasions.  Peter was himself a character.  He
was a Dutchman.  Mr Janrin had engaged his services many years before
during a visit to Holland.  He had picked Peter out of a canal, or Peter
had picked him out, on a dark night--I never could understand which had
rendered the service to the other; at all events, it had united them
ever afterwards, and Peter had afterwards nursed his master through a
long illness, and saved his life.  The most important secrets of State
might have been discussed freely in Peter's presence.  First, he did not
understand a word that was said, and then he was far too honest and
discreet to have revealed it if he had.

Several people had been announced.  Ten minutes generally brought the
whole together.  I caught the name of one--Captain Hassall.  He was a
stranger, a strongly-built man with a sunburnt countenance and bushy
whiskers; nothing remarkable about him, except, perhaps, the determined
expression of his eye and mouth.  His brow was good, and altogether I
liked his looks, and was glad to find myself seated next to him.  He had
been to all parts of the world, and had spent some time in the India and
China seas.  He gave me graphic accounts of the strange people of those
regions; and fights with Chinese and Malay pirates, battles of a more
regular order with French and Spanish privateers, hurricanes or
typhoons.  Shipwrecks and exciting adventures of all sorts seemed
matters of everyday occurrence.  A scar on his cheek and another across
his hand, showed that he had been, at close quarters, too, on some
occasion, with the enemy.

Mr Janrin and Mr Thursby both paid him much attention during dinner.
Allusions were made by him to a trading voyage he had performed in the
service of the firm, and it struck me from some remarks he let drop that
he was about to undertake another of a similar character.  I was not
mistaken.  After dinner, when the rest of the guests were gone, he
remained behind to discuss particulars, and Mr Janrin desired me to
join the conclave.  I was much interested in all I heard.  A large new
ship, the _Barbara_, had been purchased, of which Captain Hassall had
become part owner.  She was now in dock fitting for sea.  She mounted
ten carriage guns and four swivels, and was to be supplied with a
proportionate quantity of small arms, and to be well manned.  A letter
of marque was to be obtained for her, though she was not to fight except
in case of necessity; while her cargo was to be assorted and suited to
various localities.  She was to visit several places to the East of the
Cape of Good Hope, and to proceed on to the Indian Islands and China.

"And how do you like the enterprise, James?" asked Mr Janrin, after the
captain had gone.

"I have not considered the details sufficiently to give an opinion,
sir," I answered.  "If all turns out as the captain expects, it must be
very profitable, but there are difficulties to be overcome, and dangers
encountered, and much loss may be incurred."

I saw Mr Janrin and the head clerk exchange glances, and nod to each
other.  I fancy that they were nods of approval at what I had said.

"Then, James, you would not wish to engage in it in any capacity?" said
Mr Janrin.  "You would rather not encounter the dangers and
difficulties of such a voyage?"

"That is a very different matter, sir," I answered.  "I should very much
like to visit the countries you speak of, and the difficulties I cannot
help seeing would enhance the interest of the voyage."

Again the principal and clerk exchanged glances and nodded.

"What do you say, then, James, to taking charge of the venture as
supercargo?  My belief is that you will act with discretion and judgment
as to its disposal, and that we shall have every reason to be satisfied
with you.  Mr Thursby agrees with me, do you not, Thursby?"

"I feel sure that Mr James will bring no discredit on the firm, sir,"
answered Mr Thursby, smiling at me.  "On the contrary, sir, no young
man I am acquainted with is so likely to conduce to the success of the
enterprise."

I was highly gratified by the kind remarks of my friends, and expressed
my thanks accordingly, at the same time that I begged I might be allowed
two days for consideration.  I desired, of course, to consult my mother,
and was anxious also to know what another would have to say to the
subject.  She, like a sensible girl, agreed with me that it would be
wise to endure the separation for the sake of securing, as I hoped to
do, ultimate comfort and independence.  I knew from the way that she
gave this advice that she did not love me less than I desired.  I need
say no more than that her confidence was a powerful stimulus to exertion
and perseverance in the career I had chosen.  My mother was far more
doubtful about the matter.  Not till the morning after I had mentioned
it to her did she say, "Go, my son; may God protect you and bless your
enterprise!"

I was from this time forward actively engaged in the preparations for
the voyage.  My personal outfit was speedily ready, but I considered it
necessary to examine all the cases of merchandise put on board, that I
might be properly acquainted with all the articles in which I was going
to trade.  "It's just what I expected of him," I heard Mr Janrin remark
to Mr Thursby, when one evening I returned late from my daily duties.
"Ay, sir, there is the ring of the true metal in the lad," observed the
head clerk.

Captain Hassall was as active in his department as I was in mine, and we
soon had the _Barbara_ ready for sea with a tolerably good crew.  In
those stirring days of warfare it was no easy thing to man a merchantman
well, but Captain Hassall had found several men who had sailed with him
on previous voyages, and they without difficulty persuaded others to
ship on board the _Barbara_.

Our first officer, Mr Randolph, was a gentleman in the main, and a very
pleasant companion, though he had at first sight, in his everyday
working suit, that scarecrow look which tall gaunt men, who have been
somewhat battered by wind and weather, are apt to get.  Our second mate,
Ben, or rather "Benjie" Stubbs, as he was usually called, was nearly as
broad as he was long, with puffed-out brown cheeks wearing an invincible
smile.  He was a man of one idea: he was satisfied with being a thorough
seaman, and was nothing else.  As to history, or science, or the
interior of countries, he was profoundly ignorant.  As to the land, it
was all very well in its way to grow trees and form harbours, but the
sea was undoubtedly the proper element for people to live on; and he
seemed to look with supreme contempt on all those who had the misfortune
to be occupied on shore.  The third mate, Henry Irby, had very little
the appearance of a sailor, though he was a very good one.  He was
slight in figure, and refined in his manners, and seemed, I fancied,
born to a higher position than that which he held.  He had served for
two years before the mast, but his rough associates during that time had
not been able in any way to alter him.  Our surgeon, David Gwynne, was,
I need scarcely say, a Welshman.  He had not had much professional
experience, but he was an intelligent young man, and had several of the
peculiarities which are considered characteristic of his people; but I
hoped, from what I saw of him when he first came on board, that he would
prove an agreeable companion.  Curious as it may seem, there were two
men among the crew who by birth were superior to any of us.  I may,
perhaps, have to say more about them by-and-bye.  We mustered, officers
and men, forty hands all told.

I will pass over the leave-takings with all the dear ones at home.  I
knew and felt that true prayers, as well as kind wishes, would follow me
wherever I might go.

"James," said my kind employer as I parted from him, "I trust you
thoroughly as I would my own son if I had one.  I shall not blame you if
the enterprise does not succeed; so do not take it to heart, for I know
that you will do your best, and no man can do more."  Mr Thursby
considered that it was incumbent on him to take a dignified farewell of
me, and to impress on me all the duties and responsibilities of my
office; but he broke down, and a tear stood in his eye as he wrung my
hand, and said in a husky voice, "You know all about it, my dear boy;
you'll do well, and we shall have you back here, hearty and strong, with
information successfully to guide Garrard, Janrin and Company in many an
important speculation; and, moreover, I hope, to lay the foundation of
your own fortune.  Good-bye, good-bye; heaven bless you, my boy!"

I certainly could not have commenced my undertaking under better
auspices.  Having obtained the necessary permission of the Honourable
East India Company to trade in their territories, the _Barbara_
proceeded to Spithead, and I ran down to pay a flying visit to my
friends, which was the cause of my joining the ship at Spithead in the
way I have described, and where I left my readers to give these
necessary explanations.

The convoy was standing on under easy sail to allow the scattered
vessels to come up, and as long as there was a ray of daylight they were
seen taking up their places.  Now and then, after dark, I could see a
phantom form gliding by; some tall Indiaman, or heavy store-ship, or
perhaps some lighter craft, to part with us after crossing the line,
bound round Cape Horn.  The heat was considerable, and as I felt no
inclination to turn in, I continued pacing the deck till it had struck
six bells in the first watch.  [Note 1.] Mr Randolph, the senior mate,
had charge of the deck.  He, I found, was not always inclined to agree
with some of the opinions held by our captain.

"He's a fine fellow, our skipper, but full of fancies, as you'll find;
but there isn't a better seaman out of the port of London," he observed,
as he took a few turns alongside me.  "I have a notion that he believes
in the yarns of the _Flying Dutchman_, and of old Boody, the Portsmouth
chandler, and in many other such bits of nonsense, but as I was
saying--"

"What, don't you?"  I asked, interrupting him; "I thought all sailors
believed in those tales."

The captain had been narrating some of them to us a few evenings before.

"No, I do not," answered the first mate, somewhat sharply.  "I believe
that God made this water beneath our feet, and that He sends the wind
which sometimes covers it over with sparkling ripples, and at others
stirs it up into foaming seas, but I don't think He lets spirits or
ghosts of any sort wander about doing no good to any one.  That's my
philosophy.  I don't intend to belief in the stuff till I see one of the
gentlemen; and then I shall look pretty sharply into his character
before I take my hat off to him."

"You are right, Mr Randolph, and I do not suppose that the captain
differs much from you.  He only wishes to guard against mortal enemies,
and he has shown that he is in earnest in thinking that there is some
danger, by having come on deck every half-hour or oftener during the
night.  There he is again."

Captain Hassall stood before us: "Cast loose and load the guns, Mr
Randolph, and send a quartermaster to serve out the small arms to the
watch," he said quietly; "there has been a sail on our quarter for some
minutes past, which may possibly be one of the convoy, but she may not.
Though she carries but little canvas she is creeping up to us."

The mate and I while talking had not observed the vessel the captain
pointed out.  "The skipper has sharp eyes," said the first mate, as he
parted from me to obey the orders he had received.  Our crew had been
frequently exercised at the guns.  Having loaded and run them out, the
watch came tumbling aft to the arm-chest.  Cutlasses were buckled on and
pistols quickly loaded, and boarding-pikes placed along the bulwarks
ready for use.  The men did not exactly understand what all this
preparation was for, but that was nothing to them.  It signified
fighting, and most British seamen are ready for that at any time.  The
captain now joined me in my walk.  "It is better to be prepared, though
nothing come of it, than to be taken unawares," he observed.  "It is the
principle I have gone on, and as it is a sound one, I intend to continue
it as long as I live."  I agreed with him.  We walked the deck together
for twenty minutes or more, engaged in conversation.  His eye was
constantly during the time looking over our starboard quarter.  Even I
could at length distinguish the dim outline of a vessel in that
direction.  Gradually the sails of a ship with taut raking masts became
visible.

"That craft is not one of our convoy, and I doubt that she comes among
us for any good purpose," exclaimed the captain.  "I should like to
bring the frigate down upon the fellow, but we should lose our share of
the work, and I think that we can manage him ourselves.  Call the
starboard watch, Mr Stubbs."

The men soon came tumbling up from below, rather astonished at being so
soon called.  The other officers were also soon on deck Mr Randolph
agreed that the stranger, which hung on our quarter like some ill-omened
bird of prey, had an exceedingly suspicious appearance, and that we were
only acting with ordinary prudence in being prepared for him.

"The fellow won't fire, as he would bring the frigate down upon him if
he did," observed the first mate; "he will therefore either run
alongside in the hopes of surprising us, and taking us by boarding
before we have time to fire a pistol, which would attract notice, or,
should the wind fall light, he may hope to cut us out with his boats."

Eight bells struck.  We could hear the sound borne faintly over the
waters from two of the Indiamen to windward of us, but no echo came from
the deck of the stranger.  The men were ordered to lie down under the
bulwarks till wanted.  Had Captain Hassall thought fit, he might, by
making sail, have got out of danger, but he had hopes that instead of
being taken by the stranger he might take him.  It struck me that we
might be running an unwarrantable risk of getting the vessel or cargo
injured by allowing ourselves to be attacked.

"Not in the least," answered the captain; "we serve as a bait to the
fellow, and shall benefit directly by catching him.  If we were to give
the alarm he would be off like a shot, and depend on it he has a fast
pair of heels, or he would not venture in among us, so that the frigate
would have little chance of catching him."

The truth is, Captain Hassall had made up his mind to do something to
boast of.  Orders were now given to the men to remain perfectly silent;
the stranger was drawing closer and closer; grapnels had been got ready
to heave on board him, and to hold him fast should it be found
advisable.  It was, however, possible that his crew might so greatly
outnumber ours that this would prove a dangerous proceeding.  As to our
men, they knew when they shipped that they might have to fight, and they
all now seemed in good heart, so that we had no fear on the score of
their failing us.  Our officers were one and all full of fight, though
each exhibited his feelings in a different way.  The surgeon's only fear
seemed to be that the stranger would prove a friend instead of a foe,
and that there would be no skirmish after all.

"She's some craft one of the other vessels has fallen in with, and she
has just joined company for protection," he observed.  "For my part I
shall turn in, as I am not likely to be wanted, either to fight or to
dress wounds."

The wind, which had much fallen, had just freshened up again.  "Whatever
he is, friend or foe, here he comes," exclaimed Mr Randolph.  "Steady,
lads!" cried the captain, "don't move till I give the word."

As he spoke the stranger glided up, her dark sails appearing to tower
high above ours.  We kept on our course as if she was not perceived.
With one sheer she was alongside, there was a crash as her yards locked
with ours, and at the same moment numerous dark forms appeared in her
rigging and nettings about to leap on to our deck.  "Now give it them!"
cried our captain.  Our men sprang to their feet and fired a broadside
through the bulwarks of the enemy.  The cries and shrieks which were
echoed back showed the havoc which had been caused.  Shouts and blows,
the clash of cutlasses, the flash of pistols, immediately followed.  I
felt a stinging sensation in my shoulder, but was too excited to think
anything of it as I stood, cutlass in hand, ready to repel our
assailants.  Many of those who were about to board us must have sprung
back, or fallen into the water; a few only reached our deck, who were at
once cut down by our people.  One man sprang close to where I stood.  I
was about to fire my pistol at him, when I saw that he was unarmed, so I
dragged him across the deck out of harm's way.  The next instant the
vessels parted.

"Give it them, my lads!  Load and fire as fast as you can, or they will
escape us," cried the captain in an excited tone.

"Wing them! wing them! knock away their spars, lads!"  He next ordered
the helm to be put down, the tacks hauled aboard, and chase to be made
after our flying foe, while a blue light was burned to show our
locality, and to prevent the frigate from firing into us when she
followed, as we hoped she would.

We had no doubt that the enemy, when he met with the warm reception we
had given him, took us for a man-of-war corvette, and on this came to
the conclusion that prudence was the best part of valour.  There could
be little doubt, however, that he would soon discover that our guns were
of no great size; and then possibly he might turn on us, and give us
more of his quality than would be desirable.  Still we kept on peppering
away at him as fast as we could, in the hopes of bringing down one of
his masts, and enabling the frigate to come up.  The lights of the
convoy were, however, by this time almost lost sight of.  In vain we
looked out for a signal of the approach of the frigate.  No gun was
heard, no light was seen.  We were afraid of losing the convoy
altogether, and certainly it would have been against the spirit of our
instructions to have attempted to deal single-handed with our opponent.
Giving the enemy a parting shot most reluctantly, Captain Hassall
therefore ordered the helm to be put up, and we ran back in the
direction in which we expected to find the convoy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  This ordinary watch consists of four hours, and the bell is
struck every half-hour.  As the first watch commences at eight, it was
then eleven.  There are two dog-watches from four to six and from six to
eight p.m., in order that the same men may not be on duty at the same
hours each day.



CHAPTER THREE.

"GOOD-BYE" TO THE CONVOY.

"Hillo! who have we here?"  I heard one of the mates exclaim, as I was
taking a last look of our receding antagonist.  "Is this a dead man?"

"No, not entirely, as yet," said a voice which proceeded, I found, from
a person lying on the deck.

I remembered my prisoner, and ran to lift him up.  He recognised my
voice.  "If it hadn't been for you I should have been dead enough by
this time," he said, getting on his feet.

"Who are you?"  I asked, "a friend or a foe?"

"A friend; or I wouldn't be here at all," he answered, in a tone which
made me feel certain that he spoke the truth.

"Well, come into the cabin, and tell me all about the matter," I said;
for though he spoke broad Irish, I saw by his manner that he was above
the rank of a common seaman.  His appearance when he came into the light
justified me in my opinion.

"It's just this; I was first mate of a fine brig, the _Kathleen_.  We
had been down in the eastern seas, and away into the Pacific, over to
America, trading for some time with the natives, and bringing hides,
seal-skins, and sandal-wood to the Chinamen; and at last, having made a
successful voyage, we were on our homeward passage, when yonder
piratical craft fell in with us.  Each man had been promised a share of
the profits, so that we had something to fight for.  Fight our poor
fellows did, till there was scarcely one of them left unhurt.  We none
of us thought of striking, though; but at last the rascally pirates ran
us aboard, and as they swarmed along our decks cut down every man who
still stood on his legs.  How I escaped without a hurt I don't know.  I
soon had other troubles; for, being uninjured, I was at once carried
aboard our captor, but before the Frenchmen could secure their prize,
she blew up, with every soul on board, and there was I left a prisoner
alone.  I almost envied the fate of our crew.  The loss of the prize,
which had cost them so many lives and so much trouble, made the
Frenchmen very savage, especially their captain, who is about as daring
a villain as ever ploughed salt water.  This determined him, when he
fell in with your convoy, to try and cut one of them out.  He fixed on
you because you were of a size which he thought he could tackle easily,
and he hoped to take you by surprise.  Why he did not kill me outright I
do not know, for he treated me like a brute from the moment he got me in
his power; and when we ran you alongside he made me get into the rigging
that I might be shot at; and I thought to myself, The safest plan is to
jump aboard, and if I escape a knock on the head I may stow myself away
before any one sees me.  Such is the end of my history at present."

The name of the vessel which had attacked us was the _Mignonne_,
privateer, of twenty guns and eighty men, Captain Jules La Roche, of the
port of Brest, we learned from the stranger.  "And your own name, my
friend?"  I asked, not feeling very sure that the truth had been told
us.  "Dennis O'Carroll.  My name will tell you where I hail from, and
you may look at me as a specimen of one of the most unfortunate men in
the world," he answered.  If O'Carroll's account of the size of our
antagonist was correct, we had good reason to be thankful that we had
escaped so easily.  Our chief anxiety was now about finding the fleet.
We had no business to have separated from them; for though we might
easily have run out to the East without encountering an enemy, yet,
should any accident have happened to us, our insurers might have
considered our charter invalidated, and Garrard, Janrin and Company
would have been the sufferers.

We were much relieved by seeing a blue light suddenly burst forth in the
darkness.  It came from the deck of the frigate, which had stood after
us to ascertain the cause of the firing.  Our adventure had the effect
of keeping the convoy much closer together; for no one could tell when
Captain La Roche would take it into his head to pounce down upon us and
pick up a stray bird, should the frigate be at a distance.  He would
have had no chance, however, with the Indiamen, whose officers were in a
very combative mood.  Not long before a very gallant action had been
performed by a squadron of them in the Eastern seas--indeed, no country
ever possessed a body of officers in her mercantile marine equal to
those of the Honourable East India Company.

I heard all about the action on board the _Cuffnells_.  One morning,
when I went on deck, I found that there was what might well be called a
calm; the sails of the ships hung up and down the masts without moving,
except every now and then, as they slowly rolled from side to side to
give a loud thundering clap, and once more to subside into sullen
silence.  The sea, smooth as a mirror, shone like burnished silver, its
surface ever and anon broken by the fin of some monster of the deep, or
by a covey of flying fish, which would dart through the air till, their
wings dried by the sun, they fell helpless again into their native
element.

Looking round I recognised the _Cuffnells_ not far off, and, remembering
my promise, asked for a boat to go on board.  I was received in the most
friendly manner, and was asked to stop to tiffin and to dinner, if I
could remain as long.

"Yes, sir, he richly deserved it; every rupee he got--that's my
opinion," observed a yellow-faced gentleman in nankeens and white
waistcoat, sitting at the other end of the table.  "I was on board the
_Earl Camden_ on my way home, and I know that, including public and
private investments, the cargoes of our ships could not have been of
less value than eight millions of pounds sterling.  We had fifteen
Indiamen and a dozen country ships, with a Portuguese craft and a brig,
the _Ganges_; Captain Dance, our captain, was commodore.  This fleet
sailed from Canton on the 31st January, 1804.  After sighting Pulo Auro,
near the Straits of Malacca, the _Royal George_, one of the Indiamen,
made the signal for four strange sail in the south-west.  On this the
commodore directed four of the Indiamen to go down and examine them.
Lieutenant Fowler, of the navy, who was a passenger on board the _Earl
Camden_, offered to go also in the _Ganges_ to inspect the strangers
more nearly.  It was a time of no small anxiety, you may be sure.  The
_Ganges_ was a fast sailer, and before long Lieutenant Fowler came back,
with the information that the squadron in sight was French, and
consisted of a line-of-battle ship, three frigates, and a brig.  The
question was now, Should we fight or not?  If we attempted to make our
escape the enemy would pursue us, and very likely pick us off in detail.
Our safest plan was to put a bold face on the matter, and show that we
were prepared for fighting.  This was our gallant commodore's opinion,
and all the other captains agreed with him, especially Captain Timins,
of the _Royal George_, who acted as his second in command.  The look-out
ships were now recalled by signal, and the line of battle formed in
close order.  As soon as the enemy could fetch in our wake they put
about, and we kept on our course under easy sail.  At near sunset they
were close up with our rear, which it seemed as if they were about to
attack.  On seeing this Captain Dance prepared with other ships to
hasten to the assistance of that part of our line.  Just as the day was
closing, however, the French, not liking our looks, and unwilling to
risk a night engagement, hauled their wind.  Lieutenant Fowler was now
sent in the _Ganges_ to station the country ships on our lee bow, by
which means we were between them and the enemy.  He brought back some
volunteers, whose assistance was acceptable.  We lay to all night--our
men at their quarters.  At daybreak of the 15th we saw the enemy also
lying to, and so, hoisting our colours, we offered them battle if they
chose to come down.  At nine, finding that they would not accept our
challenge, we formed the order of sailing, and steered our course under
easy sail.  The enemy on this filled their sails and edged down towards
us.  Now was the time that the mettle of our merchant skippers was to be
tried.  Did they, flinch?--Not a bit of it!  The commodore, finding that
the enemy proposed to attack and cut off our rear, made the signal for
the fleet to tack and bear down on him, and engage in succession--the
_Royal George_ being the leading ship, the _Ganges_ next, and then the
_Earl Camden_.  This manoeuvre was beautifully performed, and we stood
towards the Frenchmen under a press of sail.  The enemy then formed in a
very close line and opened fire on the headmost ships, which was not
returned till they got much closer.  What do you think of it?  Two
merchantmen and a brig engaging a line-of-battle ship, two frigates, and
two other ships of war--for the rest of the fleet had not yet got up.
The _Royal George_ bore the brunt of the action, for Captain Timins took
his ship as close to the enemy as they would let him, and the _Ganges_
and _Earl Camden_ opened their fire as soon as their guns could take
effect.  Before, however, any of the other ships could get into action
the Frenchmen hauled their wind and stood away to the eastward, under
all the sail they could set.  On this, at about two p.m., the signal was
made for a general chase, and away went the fleet of merchantmen after
the men-of-war.  We pursued them for two hours, when the commodore,
fearing that we might be led too far from the mouth of the straits, made
the signal to tack, and in the evening we anchored ready to pass through
the straits in the morning.  We afterwards found that the squadron we
had engaged was that of Admiral Linois, consisting of the _Marengo_, 84
guns, the _Belle Poule_ and _Semillante_, heavy frigates, a corvette of
28 guns, and a Batavian brig of 18 guns.  That the Frenchmen either took
some of our big ships for men-of-war, or fancied that some men-of-war
were near at hand and ready to come to our assistance, is very probable,
but that does not detract from the gallantry of the action.  The
Patriotic Fund voted swords and plate to Captain Dance and other
officers, and the East India Company presented him with 2,000 guineas
and a piece of plate worth 500, and Captain Timins 1,000 guineas and a
piece of plate, and all the other captains and officers and men rewards
in plate or money, the whole amounting to not less than 50,000.  But
they deserved it, sir--they deserved it; and I suspect that Admiral
Linois and his officers must have pulled out the best part of their hair
when they discovered the prize they had lost.  Besides the reward I have
mentioned, Commodore Dance was very properly knighted.  In its result,"
continued the speaker, "the action was most important."

"But it was scarcely so annoying to the enemy as another in which some
Indiamen were engaged in 1800," observed a military officer, laying down
his knife and fork, and wiping his moustache.  "I was on my passage out
on board the _Exeter_, one of the Indiamen of 1,200 tons, commanded by
Captain Meriton.  We had in company the _Bombay Castle, Coutts_, and
_Neptune_, of the same tonnage, besides other ships under the convoy of
the _Belligeux_, of 64 guns, Captain Bulteel.  A French squadron of
three large frigates, it appeared, after committing a good deal of
mischief on the coast of Africa, had crossed over to Rio de la Plata to
refit, and had just again put to sea, when, early in the morning, they
made out a part, and some of the lighter ships, probably, of our convoy.
Hoping to pick up some prizes, the Frenchmen stood towards us, and we,
quite ready for the encounter, bore down towards them.  No sooner,
however, did the Frenchmen see our big China ships, with their two tiers
of ports and warlike look, than they bore up under a press of sail, and
by signal separated.  While the _Belligeux_ steered for the largest of
the French ships, she signalled to the Indiamen I have mentioned to
proceed in chase of the others, we and the _Bombay Castle_ of one of
them, the _Medee_, and the other two of the _Franchise_.  We, at the
time, were nearer the _Medee_ than was the _Bombay Castle_, and we also
sailed better.  The chase was a long one, but we kept the enemy in
sight, and it was near midnight before we came up with her.  The _Bombay
Castle_ was a long way astern, and the frigate might have handled us
very severely, if not knocked us to pieces, before she could have come
up to our assistance.  Captain Meriton was not a man to be daunted.
With the decks lighted and all our ports up, he ran alongside the
Frenchman--`Strike, monsieur, to a superior force, to his Britannic
Majesty's ship _Thunderaboo_' he shouted out.  `Strike, I say, or--' We
did not know whether the Frenchman would reply with a broadside, which
would have greatly staggered us.  Instead of that the Frenchman politely
replied that he yielded to the fortune of war.  `Come aboard
immediately,' was the order our bold captain next gave.  Not to be
surpassed by the Frenchman, we had a guard ready to assist the captain
up our high side.  With the profoundest of bows he delivered his sword,
and he was then asked into the cabin.  Immediately we had him safe,
keeping the frigate under our guns, we sent armed boats on board, and
brought away part of her people.  When the _Bombay Castle_ came up she
received the remainder, and we then placed a prize crew on board.
Meantime the suspicions of the French captain had been aroused.  He had
observed the small size of our guns.  The appearance of the Indiaman's
cuddy and the gentlemen and lady passengers--not that there were many of
the latter--must have raised curious doubts in his mind.  Suddenly he
jumped up and asked to what ship he had struck.

"`To the Honourable East India Company's ship _Exeter_,' answered
Captain Meriton, with a bow which beat the Frenchman's.

"`What, to a merchantman?' exclaimed the Frenchman, with a look of
dismay.

"`Yes, monsieur, to a merchantman,' said Captain Meriton, with a gentle
smile, which it would have been difficult to repress.

"`It is not fair; it is vile! it is a cheat!' exclaimed the Frenchman,
beginning to stalk up and down the cabin, to grind his teeth, and to
pull out his hair.  `I say it is a cheat; give me back my ship, send on
board my men, and I will fight you bravely.  You will soon see if you
take me again.'

"`I am ready to acknowledge that you would very likely take me, as I
should certainly deserve to be taken for my folly in agreeing to your
proposal.  You will excuse me if I therefore decline it,' was the
answer.  Though we pitied the feelings of the poor man, it was very
difficult to keep our countenance as he uttered his expressions of
indignation and anger.  He did not recover his spirits till his frigate
was out of sight."

This anecdote was followed by several others.  Those were pleasant hours
I spent on board the old Indiaman.  My visits to her were indeed an
agreeable change from the sea-life routine of my own ship.  I was amused
by the progress in intimacy made among themselves by the younger portion
of the passengers since I first went aboard at Spithead.  The captain
confided to me the fact that it cost him much more trouble to maintain
discipline in the cuddy than among his crew.  "What with my young ladies
and my chronometers, it is as much as an elderly gentleman can well
accomplish to keep all things straight," he observed, glancing at
several young couples who were pacing the deck, the gentlemen being
cadets or writers.  "The friends of those girls now--nice young
creatures they are too,--have sent them out fully expecting that they
would marry nabobs or colonels at least, and in spite of all my
precautions, they have gone and engaged themselves to those young
fellows who have only just got their feet on the ratlines.  Small blame
to the gentlemen, however, for a more charming consignment I never had,
only the more charming the more difficult to manage."

While the calms lasted, I paid daily visits to my friends, but at length
a breeze springing up we proceeded on our voyage, as I must with my
narrative, or I may chance not to get to the end of it.  We called off
the beautiful island of Madeira, with its picturesque town of Funchal--
more attractive on the outside than within; we procured, however, a
welcome supply of fresh meat, vegetables, and fruits.  On our crossing
the line, Neptune and his Tritons came on board and played their usual
pranks.  Jack little thinks that on such occasions he is performing a
very ancient ceremony, practised by those bold voyagers, the
Carthaginians; to them there is little doubt that the secret of the
mariner's compass was known.  On sailing between the Pillars of Hercules
into the wide Atlantic they were visited, not by Hercules himself, but
by his representative priests, to whom they were wont to deliver certain
votive offerings that the propitiated divinity might protect them on
their perilous voyage.  The custom of performing ceremonies of a like
description was continued to later times by the mariners of the Levant,
Greece, and Italy, long after the temple of Hercules was in ruins.  When
they, and those northern seamen who had learned the scientific parts of
navigation from them, extended their voyages across the line, they
continued the practices, substituting Neptune for Hercules, and adding a
few caricatures to suit their own more barbarous taste.

Having crossed the line, and there being no longer much risk of our
meeting the cruisers of the enemy, Captain Hassall, who had long fumed
at being kept back by the slow sailing of our companions, determined to
part company.  We accordingly hoisted our colours, gave a salute of nine
guns in acknowledgment of the civilities we had received, and under all
sail soon ran the dignified moving convoy out of sight.  Light and
contrary winds and calms kept us so long under the sun of the tropics
that the seams of our decks began to open, and, to get them caulked and
other repairs executed, we bore up for Saint Salvador on the coast of
Brazil, belonging to Portugal.  We saluted the fort on entering, and
paid every necessary respect to the authorities; but we soon found that
they either suspected our character, or were not inclined, for some
other reason, to treat us in a friendly spirit.  A guard was put on
board, and we were told that neither officers nor crew must leave the
ship.

We were still ignorant of the cause of this treatment, when the master
of an English whaler came alongside with his men armed to the teeth.  He
told us that he had a letter of marque, and that on the strength of it,
having fallen in with a Spanish merchantman some way to the south-west,
he had chased and captured her, and found a large number of dollars on
board.  Having come into Saint Salvador he found there no less than
seven other Spanish vessels, the masters and crews of which were
favoured by the Portuguese, and he heard that they threatened to follow
him out and capture him and his prize.  Our arrival had turned the
scales in his favour, and he offered to remain if we would accompany him
out when we were ready.  This Captain Hassall readily promised to do.
As the whaler was strongly manned, a good-sized crew had been put on
board the prize, and thus our three vessels were somewhat of a match for
the Spaniards, we hoped.  At length the Governor of the place ordered
the officers of the ship to appear before him.  Accordingly Captain
Hassall, the first mate, and I, accompanied by Dennis O'Carroll, who
seemed to be able to speak every language under the sun except pure
English, as interpreter, went on shore under an escort.  The Governor, a
fat, swarthy personage in the full dress uniform of a general, received
us in a haughty manner, and cross-questioned us in the most minute and
tedious manner.  Dennis somewhat puzzled him by the style of his
answers, which were anything but literal translations of what Captain
Hassall said.  The result, however, was favourable, and we were allowed
to go wherever we chose about the city, and to get the necessary repairs
of our ships executed, and to obtain all the stores and provisions we
required.

Much relieved, we made our bows, and then took a turn through the place
before going on board.  I was much struck with the number of churches,
of priests and monks, and black slaves, the latter habited in the most
scanty garments, and the former perambulating the streets in parties,
dressed up in the richest attire of coloured silks and gold, with
banners and crosses, and statues of saints, or representations of events
mentioned in the Scriptures, the figures as large as life.  A large
number of friars in black, or brown, or grey gowns of coarse cloth, with
ropes round their waists, were going about two and two, with small
figures of saints on money boxes.  The figures they literally thrust
into the faces of the passers-by to be kissed.  We saw no one refuse to
drop a coin into the box.

"These must be a very religiously disposed people," I observed to
Dennis.

"If you knew what I do you wouldn't say that," he answered.  "They're
fond of sinning, and they are ready to pay for it.  The reason that all
these priests and monks flourish is this--they have succeeded in
teaching the people that they can buy pardon for all the sins they
commit.  The only scrap of real religion the poor people are allowed to
possess is the knowledge that sin must be punished if not forgiven.
Instead, however, of showing them how forgiveness can alone be obtained,
they make them believe that money can buy it through the prayers of the
saints; but when they've got the money in their own pockets, it's very
little trouble they give the saints about the matter at all."

"How did you learn all this, Mr O'Carroll?"  I asked.

"Just because I believed it all myself," he answered quickly.  "I'll
tell you some day how I came to find out that I had been sailing on a
wrong tack; but you think me now a harum-scarum Irishman, and I'm afraid
to talk about the matter."

On our way we passed through the dockyard, where a fifty-gun ship was
building, and several smaller vessels of war.  We were looking at one
repairing alongside the quay, when I saw O'Carroll start, and look
eagerly at the people on board.

"That's her, I'm certain of it!" he exclaimed.  "She has got into
trouble since she parted from you, or you may have done her more harm
than you thought for, and she has put in here with false papers and
under false colours to repair damages."

"What vessel do you mean?"  I asked.

"Why, the _Mignonne_ to be sure, or by what other name she may go," he
answered.  "Probably she is now the _San Domingo_, or some other saint
under Spanish colours, and hailing from some port on the other side of
the Horn.  Our friend, Captain Brown, of the whaler, had better make
haste, or she will be after him and his prize."

"Why not after us then?"  I asked.

"Because Captain La Roche has had enough of your quality, I suspect," he
replied.  "He is a fellow who only fights when he is sure of booty, and
though I daresay that he would like to send you to the bottom, he would
not go out of his way either for revenge or glory."

To satisfy ourselves we examined the stranger as narrowly as we could,
and O'Carroll was thoroughly convinced that he was right in his
suspicions.  While thus employed a man appeared at the companion watch.

"Why, there is La Roche himself!" he cried out.  Scarcely had he spoken
than a bullet whizzed by his head.  "That settles the matter," he said,
quite coolly.  "Let us be out of this, or he will be following up this
compliment."  We hurried out of the dockyard.  I proposed making a
complaint to the authorities.

"And be detained here several weeks and gain nothing in the end," he
answered, shaking his head.  "My advice is, get ready for sea as fast as
you can, and if you wish to serve Captain Brown see him safe out of
sight of land before the _Mignonne_ can follow.  We'll keep a watch on
him in the meantime, or he'll play us some trick or other.  Above all
things, don't be on shore after dark.  La Roche has plenty of friends
here, depend on that, and he will find means to pick us off if he thinks
that we are likely to inconvenience him."

Following O'Carroll's suggestions I immediately returned on board.
Captain Hassall at first scarcely credited the account we gave him--
indeed, he did not, I saw, put thorough confidence in O'Carroll.
However, he agreed that we ought to warn Captain Brown, and that it
would be well for us also to sail before the supposed privateer was
ready for sea.



CHAPTER FOUR.

THE "BARBARA" ON FIRE.

We had got our decks caulked, our rigging set up, and other repairs
finished, when, one forenoon, O'Carroll, who had at length ventured on
shore, returned in a great hurry with the information that there was
much bustle on board the _Mignonne_, and that her people were evidently
hurrying to the utmost to get ready for sea.  Had Captain Hassall
followed his own inclinations, he would have given the piratical
Frenchman the opportunity of trying his strength with the _Barbara_; but
as that would have been decidedly objected to by Garrard, Janrin and
Company, we, with the whaler and her prize, and another English vessel,
cleared out as secretly as we could, and, with a fair breeze, put to
sea.  We had to lay to for the other vessels, and after they had joined
us Captain Brown hailed us, to say that the look-out from his
main-topgallant mast-head had seen a large ship coming out of the
harbour under all sail, and that he thought it possible she might be the
_Mignonne_.  As, however, a mist had soon afterwards arisen, she was
concealed from sight.  We promised, however, to stand to the northward
with Captain Brown during the night, and in the morning, should no enemy
be in sight, let him and his consorts proceed on their voyage homewards,
while we kept on our course for the Cape of Good Hope.  Nothing could
have given our people greater satisfaction than to have found the
Frenchman close to us at daybreak.  I spent most of the night in writing
letters home, to send by the whaler.  When morning dawned, not a sail,
except our own little squadron, was to be seen.  We kept company till
noon, and then, with mutual good wishes, stood away on our respective
courses.  We hoped that the _Mignonne_ would follow the _Barbara_ rather
than our friends, should she really have sailed in chase of any of us.
The possibility of our being pursued created much excitement on board.
At early dawn, till the evening threw its mantle over the ocean, we had
volunteers at the mastheads looking out for a strange sail.  At the end
of four or five days all expectation of again meeting with the
_Mignonne_ ceased, somewhat to the disappointment of most of the crew,
who were wonderfully full of fight.  Having beaten the Frenchman once,
they were very sure that they could beat him again.  We had other good
reasons for having our eyes about us--first, to avoid in time any foe
too big to tackle; and then, as we had the right to capture any Spanish
vessels we might fall in with, to keep a look-out for them.  However,
the ocean is very broad, and though we chased several vessels, they all
proved to be Portuguese.  After sighting the little rocky and then
uninhabited island of Tristan da Cunha, we made the Cape of Good Hope,
and, entering Table Bay, dropped our anchor off Capetown.

The colony had lately been recaptured from the Dutch by Sir David Baird
and Sir Home Popham, with a well-appointed force of 5,000 men.  The two
armies met on the plain at the foot of Table Mountain; but scarcely had
the action been commenced by General Ferguson, at the head of the
Highland brigade, than the wise Hollanders, considering that the English
were likely to prove as good masters as the French, retreated, and soon
after offered to capitulate, which they were allowed to do with all the
honours of war.  The Dutch, French, and English were now living on very
friendly terms with each other.  The Cape colony, with its clean,
well-laid-out English capital, its Table Mountain and Table Cloth, its
vineyards, its industrious and sturdy Boers, its Hottentot slaves, and
its warlike Kaffirs, is too well-known to require a description.  I did
a good deal of trading--a matter of private interest to Garrard, Janrin
and Company, so I will not speak of it.  The ship was put to rights, we
enjoyed ourselves very much on shore, and were once more at sea.  Strong
easterly winds drove us again into the Atlantic, and when we had
succeeded in beating back to the latitude of Capetown, the weather,
instead of improving, looked more threatening than ever.  I had heard of
the peculiar swell off the Cape, but I had formed no conception of the
immense undulations I now beheld.  They came rolling on slow and
majestically, solid-looking, like mountains of malachite, heaving up our
stout ship as if she were a mere chip of deal cast on the face of the
ocean.  We were alone on the waste of waters, no other objects in sight
besides these huge green masses, which, as the clouds gathered, were
every instant becoming of a darker and more leaden hue.

"We shall get a breeze soon, and I hope that it will be from the right
quarter for us," I remarked to Benjie Stubbs, the second mate, who had
charge of the deck.

"We shall have a breeze, and more than we want, Pusser," (intended for
Purser, a name Benjie always persisted in giving me), he answered,
glancing round the horizon.  "You've not seen anything like this before,
eh?  A man must come to sea to know what's what.  There are strange
sights on the ocean."

"So I have always heard," I remarked.

"Yes, you'd have said so if you had been on deck last night in the
middle watch," he observed, in a low tone.

"How so? what happened?"  I asked.

"Why, just this," he answered.  "There was not more wind than there is
now, and the sky was clear, with a slice of a moon shining brightly,
when, just as I was looking along its wake, what did I see but a
full-rigged, old-fashioned ship, under all sail, bearing down towards us
at a tremendous rate.  When she got within a couple of hundred fathoms
of us she hove-to and lowered a boat.  I guessed well enough what she
was, so, running forward, I cast loose one of the guns and pointed at
the boat.  They aboard the stranger knew what I was after; the boat was
hoisted in again, and away she went right in the teeth of the wind."

"Did you see this last night?"  I asked, looking the mate in the face.
"I should like to speak to some of the men who saw it at the same time."

"I don't say all saw it.  You may ask those who did, and you won't get a
different story from what I've told you," he replied.

"And what think you was the ship you saw?"  I asked.

"The _Flying Dutchman_, of course, and no manner of doubt about the
matter," he answered promptly.  [Note 1.] "If you had been on the
look-out you would have seen him as clearly as I did.  Remember, Pusser,
if you ever fall in with him, don't let him come aboard, that's all.
He'll send you to the bottom as surely as if a red-hot shot was to be
dropped into the hold."

"Who is this _Flying Dutchman_?"  I asked, wishing to humour Benjie by
pretending to believe his story.

"Why, as to that, there are two opinions," he answered, as if he was
speaking of authenticated facts.  "Some say that he was an honest
trader, that he was bound in for Table Bay, when he was ordered off by
the authorities, and that, putting to sea, he was lost; others say that
he was a piratical gentleman, and that on one occasion, when short of
provisions, being driven off the land by contrary winds, he swore a
great oath that he would beat about till the day of doom, but that get
in he would.  He and all his crew died of starvation, but the oath has
been kept; and when gales are threatening, or mischief of any kind
brewing, he is to be met with, trying in vain to accomplish his vow."

I smiled at Benjie's account, whereat he pretended to look very
indignant, as if I had doubted his veracity.  I afterwards made
inquiries among the seamen.  Two or three asserted that they had
witnessed an extraordinary sight during the night, but they all differed
considerably in their accounts.  It may be supposed that they were
trying to practise on the credulity of a greenhorn.  My belief is that
they really fancied that they had seen what they described.

The clouds grew thicker and thicker till they got as black as ink.  The
sea became of a dark leaden hue, and the swell increased in height, so
that when we sank down into the intermediate valley, we could not see
from the deck beyond the watery heights on either side of us.

"Ah, the skipper is right; we shall have it before long, hot and
furious."

This remark, made by Benjie Stubbs, followed the captain's order to send
down all our lighter spars, and to make everything secure on deck, as
well as below.  The ship was scarcely made snug before the tempest broke
on us.  The high, smooth rollers were now torn and wrenched asunder as
it were, their summits wreathed with masses of foam, which curled over
as they advanced against the wind, and breaking into fragments, blew off
in masses of snowy whiteness to leeward.  I scarcely thought that a
fabric formed by human hands could have sustained the rude shocks we
encountered till the ship was got on her course, and we were able to
scud before the gale.  Often the sea rose up like a dead wall, and
seemed as if it must fall over our deck and send us to the bottom.  The
scene was trying in the daytime, but still more so when darkness covered
the face of the deep, and it needed confidence in the qualities of our
ship, and yet greater in God's protecting power, not to feel overcome
with dread.  There was a grandeur in the spectacle which kept me on
deck, and it was not till after the steward had frequently summoned me
to supper that I could tear myself from it.  Curious was the change to
the well-lighted, handsome cabin, with the supper things securely placed
between fiddles and puddings [Note 1.] on the swing table.  The first
mate had charge of the deck.  Stubbs was busily employed fortifying his
nerves.  "You now know, Pusser, what a gale off the Cape is," he
observed, looking up with his mouth half full of beef and biscuit.

"Yes, indeed," said I.  "Fine weather, too, for your friend the
_Dutchman_ to be cruising."

"Ay, and likely enough we shall see him, too," he answered.  "It was
just such a night as this, some five years back, that we fell in with
him off here; and our consort, as sound a ship as ever left the Thames,
with all hands, was lost.  It's my belief that he put a boat aboard her
by one of his tricks."  I saw Captain Hassall and Irby exchange glances.
Stubbs was getting on his favourite subject.

"Well, now, I've doubled this Cape a dozen times or more, and have never
yet once set eyes on this Dutch friend of yours, Benjie," exclaimed
O'Carroll.  "Mind you call me if we sight his craft; I should like to
`ya, ya' a little with him, and just ask him where he comes from, and
what he's about, and maybe if I put the question in a civil way I'll get
a civil answer."  By-the-bye, Captain Hassall and I had been so well
pleased with O'Carroll, and so satisfied as to his thorough knowledge of
the regions we were about to visit and the language of the people, that
we had retained him on board as supernumerary mate.

"Don't you go and speak to him now, if you value the safety of the ship,
or our lives," exclaimed Stubbs, in a tone of alarm.  "You don't know
what trick he'll play you if you do.  Let such gentry alone, say I."

We all laughed at the second mate's earnestness, though I cannot say
that all the rest of those present disbelieved in the existence of the
condemned _Dutchman_.  The state of the atmosphere, the strange, wild,
awful look of the ocean, prepared our minds for the appearance of
anything supernatural.  The captain told me that I looked ill and tired
from having been on deck so many hours, and insisted on my turning in,
which I at length unwillingly did.

In spite of the upheaving motion of the ship, and the peculiar sensation
as she rushed down the watery declivity into the deep valley between the
seas, I fell asleep.  The creaking of the bulkheads, the whistling of
the wind in the rigging, the roaring of the seas, and their constant
dash against the sides, were never out of my ears, and oftentimes I
fancied that I was on deck witnessing the tumult of the ocean--now that
the _Flying Dutchman_ was in sight, now that our own good ship was
sinking down overwhelmed by the raging seas.

"Mr Stubbs wants you on deck, sir; she's in sight, sir, he says, she's
in sight," I heard a voice say, while I felt my elbow shaken.  The
speaker was Jerry Nott, our cabin-boy.  I slipped on my clothes,
scarcely knowing what I was about.

"What o'clock is it?"  I asked.  "Gone two bells in the morning watch,"
he answered.  I sprang on deck.  The dawn had broke.  The wind blew as
hard as ever.  The sky and sea were of a leaden grey hue, the only spots
of white were the foaming crests of the seas and our closely-reefed
foretop sails.  "There, there!  Do you see her now?" asked Stubbs,
pointing ahead.  As we rose to the top of a giant sea I could just
discover in the far distance, dimly seen amid the driving spray, the
masts of a ship, with more canvas set than I should have supposed would
have been shown to such a gale.  While I was looking I saw another ship
not far beyond the first.  We were clearly nearing them.

"What do you think of that?" asked Stubbs.

"That there are two ships making very bad weather of it, Mr Stubbs,"
answered the captain, who at that moment had come on deck.  He took a
look through his glass.

"She is a large ship--a line-of-battle ship, I suspect," he observed.

"Looks like one," said Stubbs.  "She'll look like something else
by-and-by."

The rest of the officers had now joined us except Mr Randolph, who had
the middle watch.  We were all watching the strangers together.  Now, as
we sank down into the hollow, the masses of spray which blew off from
the huge sea uprising between us and them, hid them from our sight.
Some differed with the captain as to the size of the largest ship.  One
or two thought that she was an Indiaman.  However, she was still so
distant, and in the grey dawn so misty-looking and indistinct, that it
was difficult to decide the question.  The captain himself was not
certain.  "However, we shall soon be able to settle the matter," he
observed, as the _Barbara_, now on the summit of a mountain billow, was
about to glide down the steep incline.  Down, down, we went--it seemed
that we should never be able to climb the opposite height.  We were all
looking out for the strangers, expecting to settle the disputed point.
"Where are they?" burst from the lips of all of us.  "Where, where?"  We
looked, we rubbed our eyes--no sail was in sight.  "I knew it would be
so," said Stubbs, in a tone in which I perceived a thrill of horror.
O'Carroll asserted that he had caught sight of the masts of a ship as if
sinking beneath the waves.

"Very likely," observed Stubbs, "that was of the ship he was sending to
the bottom,--the other was the _Dutchman_, and you don't see her now."

"No, no, they were craft carrying human beings, and they have foundered
without a chance of one man out of the many hundreds on board being
saved!" exclaimed the captain.

Stubbs shook his head as if he doubted it.  We careered on towards the
spot where the ships had gone down, for that real ships had been there
no doubt could be entertained.  A strict look-out was kept for anything
that might still be floating to prove that we had not been deceived by
some phantom forms.  Those on the look-out forward reported an object
ahead.  "A boat! a boat!" shouted one of them.  "No boat could live in
such a sea," observed the captain.  He was right.  As we approached, we
saw a grating, to which a human being was clinging.  It was, when first
seen, on the starboard bow, and it was, alas! evident that we should
leave him at too great a distance even to heave a rope to which he might
clutch.  By his dress he appeared to be a seaman.  He must have observed
our approach; but he knew well enough that we could make no attempt to
save him.  He gazed at us steadily as we glided by--his countenance
seemed calm--he uttered no cry--still he clung to his frail raft.  He
could not make up his mind to yield to death.  It was truly a painful
sight.  We anxiously watched him till we left the raft to which he still
clung far astern.  No other person was seen, but other objects were
seen--floating spars, planks, gratings--to prove that we were near a
spot where a tall ship had gone down.  "It is better so," observed the
captain; "unless the sea had cast them on our deck we could not have
saved one of them."  We rushed on up and down the watery heights, Stubbs
as firmly convinced as ever that the _Flying Dutchman_ had produced the
fearful catastrophe we had witnessed.  On we went--the gale in no way
abating.  I watched the mountain seas till I grew weary of looking at
them; still I learned to feel perfectly secure--a sensation I was at
first very far from experiencing.  Yet much, if not everything, depended
on the soundness of our spars and rigging: a flaw in the wood or rope
might be the cause of our destruction.  I went below at meal-time, but I
hurried again on deck, fascinated by the scene, though I would gladly
have shut it out from my sight.  At length, towards night, literally
wearied with the exertion of keeping my feet and watching those giant
seas, I went below and turned in.  I slept, but the huge white-crested
waves were still rolling before me, and big ships were foundering, and
phantom vessels were sailing in the wind's eye, and I heard the
bulkheads creaking, the wind whistling, and the waves roaring, as loudly
as if I was awake; only I often assigned a wrong sign to the uproar.
Hour after hour this continued, when, as I had at last gone off more
soundly, a crash echoed in my ears, followed by shrieks and cries.  It
did not, however, awake me.  It seemed a part of the strange dreams in
which I was indulging.  I thought that the ship had struck on a rock,
that I escaped to the shore, had climbed up a lofty cliff, on the summit
of which I found a wood fire surrounded by savages.  They dragged me to
it--I had the most fearful forebodings of what they were about to do.
Then I heard the cry, "Fire! fire!"  That was a reality--the smell of
fire was in my nostrils--I started up--I was alone in the cabin.  The
ship was plunging about in an awful manner.  I hurried on my clothes and
rushed on deck.  Daylight had broke.  The ship lately so trim seemed a
perfect wreck.  The foremast had been carried away, shivered to the
deck, and hung over the bows, from which part of the crew were
endeavouring to clear it.  The main and mizen-topmasts had likewise been
carried away.  Smoke was coming up the fore hatchway, down which the
rest of the people were pouring buckets of water.  I went forward to
render assistance.  The foremast had been struck by lightning, and the
electric fluid, after shattering it, had descended into the hold and set
the ship on fire.  We worked with the desperation of despair.  Should
the fire once gain the mastery, no human power could save us.  The sea
was running as high as ever; it was with difficulty that the ship could
be kept before it.  I exchanged but a few words with my companions; a
bucket was put into my hands, and I at once saw what I had to do.  The
smoke after a time had decreased, for as yet no flames had burst forth.
"Now, lads, follow me," cried Randolph, the first officer, leaping below
with his bucket and an axe in his hand.  Irby and four men sprang after
him.  With his axe the mate cut a way to get at the heart of the fire.
We handed down buckets to his companions, who kept emptying them round
where he was working.  The smoke was still stifling.  Those below could
scarcely be seen as they worked amidst it.  The bulkhead was cut
through.  The seat of the mischief was discovered.  Flames were bursting
forth, but wet blankets were thrown on them.  The buckets were passed
rapidly down.  The smoke was decreasing.  "Hurrah, lads! we shall have
it under!" cried the first mate, in an encouraging tone.  We breathed
more freely.  The fire was subdued.  The peril had indeed been great.
We had now to clear the wreck of the mast, which threatened to stave in
the bows.  "The gale is breaking," cried the captain, after looking
round the horizon; "cheer up, my lads, and we shall do well!"
Encouraged by the captain the men laboured on, though from the violent
working of the ship it was not without great difficulty and danger that
the mass of spars, ropes, and canvas could be hauled on board or cast
adrift.  As a landsman my assistance was not of much value, though I
stood by clinging to the bulwarks, to lend a hand in case I should be
required.  While glancing to windward, as I did every now and then, in
hopes of seeing signs of the abatement of the gale, I caught sight of
what seemed the wing of an albatross, skimming the summit of a tossing
sea.  I looked again and again.  There it still was as at first.  I
pointed it out to the captain.  "A sail running down towards us," he
observed; "it is to be hoped that she is a friend, for we are in a sorry
plight to meet with a foe."  The captain's remark made me feel not a
little anxious as to the character of the approaching stranger.  After a
time it became evident that the wind was really falling.  The wreck of
the mast was at last cleared away, but a calm sea would be required
before we could attempt to get up a jury-mast.  We had watched the
approach of the stranger: she was steering directly for us.  As she drew
nearer I saw O'Carroll examining her narrowly through the glass.  "Here
comes the _Flying Dutchman_ again," I observed to Stubbs.

"Not at all certain that she isn't," he answered, quite in a serious
tone.

"No, she's not that, but she's ten times worse," exclaimed O'Carroll;
"she is the _Mignonne_, as I am a seaman, and will be bothering us
pretty considerably, depend on that."

We heartily hoped that he was mistaken, but certainly she was very like
the craft we had seen at Saint Salvador.  She passed us as near as the
heavy sea still running would allow her to do without danger to herself.
A man was standing in the mizen rigging.  I caught sight of his face
through my telescope.  I thought that I distinguished a look of
satisfaction in his countenance as he gazed at us.  "That's La Roche; I
know the villain!" cried O'Carroll; "I thought from what I heard that he
was bound out here.  He'll work us ill, depend on that."  We now wished
that the sea had continued to run as high as it had hitherto been doing,
when it would have been impossible for the privateer to have boarded us.
It was now, however, rapidly going down, though as yet it was too rough
to allow her to attempt to run alongside.  It was possible that she
might pass us.  No!  After running on a short distance her yards were
braced sharp up, and she stood back, with the evident intention of
attacking our helpless craft.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  Contrivances to prevent articles falling off a table at sea.

Note 2.  We never hear of the _Flying Dutchman_ now-a-days.  The fact is
that he had the monopoly of sailing or going along rather in the teeth
of the wind.  Now steamers have cut him out, and he is fain to hide his
diminished head.



CHAPTER FIVE.

A DESPERATE ENCOUNTER.

O'Carroll's alarm increased as he saw the privateer approaching.  "We
shall all have our throats cut to a certainty," he cried out.  "They
will not leave one of us alive to go home to our disconsolate widows to
tell them all that has happened.  I know them too well, the villains!
Arrah! it was an unfortunate moment that ever I was brought to tumble
twice into the hands of such gentry."

"We are not in their hands yet, and if we make a good fight of it, maybe
we never shall," exclaimed Captain Hassall.  "My lads, if you'll stand
by me, I'll hold out as long as the craft can float.  We beat off this
same fellow once before--let's try if we can't beat him off again."

This brief address inspirited our crew, and, almost worn out with
fatigue as they were, they promised to defend themselves to the last.
My sensations, as we saw the enemy approach, were not altogether
pleasant.  We might beat him off in the end; but even that, in our
present condition, was not likely; and how many of our number might not
be struck down in the struggle!  In the meantime, the men armed
themselves with pistols and cutlasses, powder and shot were got up, and
every preparation made for the fight.  The enemy approached, but as he
had run to leeward, it was some time before he could work up to pass us
to windward.  We had carried a stay from the mainmast to the bowsprit,
and on this we managed to set a sail, so that the ship was tolerably
under control.  When the enemy, therefore, at last passed under our
stern, we were able to luff up and avoid the raking fire he poured in.
No damage was done to any of our people, but a shot struck the mainmast,
and wounded it so badly that it was evident that, with any additional
strain, it would be carried away altogether.  Putting up the helm, we
again ran off before the wind.  The enemy was soon after us, but though
he came up abeam in the heavy sea still running, his aim was of
necessity uncertain, and for some time not a shot struck us, while
several of ours struck him.  This encouraged our men, who gave vent to
their satisfaction whenever he was hulled, or a shot went through his
sails.  Our hopes of success were, however, soon brought to an end, for,
as we were compelled to luff up suddenly, to avoid being raked, as he
was about to cross our bows, the heavy strain on our wounded mast
carried it away, and with it the mizen-topmast, and there we lay a
helpless wreck in the trough of the sea, at the mercy of the enemy.
Still, as we could work our guns we would not give in, but hoisting our
flag on the mizen-mast we continued firing as long as we could bring our
guns to bear.  A loud cheer burst from the throats of our crew; the
Frenchman was standing away.  This exultation was rather too
precipitate.  As soon as he got out of range of our guns, he hove-to and
began firing away from a long gun, the shot from which occasionally hit
us.  One poor fellow was killed and two wounded.  It was clear that the
privateer was merely waiting till the sea should go down, when he would
run alongside and capture us without difficulty.

Captain Hassall at last, seeing what must inevitably occur, called the
officers round him, and proposed surrendering.  "The villains will cut
all our throats if we do, that's all," observed O'Carroll.  "I would
rather hold out to the last and sell our lives dearly."  Most of us were
of O'Carroll's opinion.

"Very well, gentlemen, so let it be," said the captain.  "I have done my
duty in offering to surrender, when I consider that successful
resistance is hopeless; still I agree with you that it would be better
to die fighting than to be murdered in cold blood."

When our guns became useless, the crew had been set to work to clear the
wreck of the mainmast, and to prepare sheers for a jury foremast.  "And
this is to be the termination of our enterprise," I thought.  I must own
I gave way to some bitter reflection.  While all hands were busily
employed, I turned my eyes westward, and there, in the very place where
the _Mignonne_ had appeared, I saw another white sail.  I pointed her
out to the captain.  "She may be a friend, and turn the tables," he
observed.  "If a foe we shall not be worse off than at present."

It soon became known that a sail was in sight.  The crew came to the
conclusion that she was a friend.  The Frenchmen at last saw her.
Whatever opinion they formed, they judged that it would be wise to
finish the fight and take possession of us.  Once more the enemy drew
near.  The firing became hotter than ever.  I turned many an anxious
glance at the approaching sail.  I felt sure that, in spite of the
staunchness of our men, we must inevitably be overpowered.  The stranger
was getting closer and closer.

"She is a frigate!" cried the captain.  "She shows English colours!
hurrah! hurrah!"  The enemy saw that the chance of capturing us was
gone.  Sweeping round us, with diabolical malice he gave a parting
broadside, which killed one man and wounded another, and then under all
the sail he could set ran off before the wind.  The frigate had now also
made more sail and closed as rapidly.  She came close to us.  "Are you
in a sinking state?" asked a voice from the frigate.  "I hope not,"
answered Captain Hassall.  "Then hold on and we'll come back to you,"
said the voice, which we took to be that of the captain.  As I was
watching the frigate through my glass, as she rushed by us, who should I
see standing in the main rigging but my own midshipman brother William!
I waved heartily to him, but he did not make me out.  From my usual
sedate manners, my shipmates seeing my gestures thought that I had gone
mad, and was waving to be taken on board the frigate.  "She is the
_Phoebe_ frigate," I exclaimed, jumping out of the rigging on deck.  "No
fear that we shall be deserted now!"  I then explained how I came to
know the name of the frigate.  All hands were now set to work to get the
ship to rights.  The chase, meantime, became very exciting.  "The
captain does not know what a fast pair of heels that privateering
scoundrel possesses, or he would not have much hopes of catching him,"
observed Captain Hassall, as he watched the two vessels.  The topsails
of the Frenchman soon disappeared beneath the horizon, and the shades of
evening at length closing down, we were left alone on the world of
waters, into which the heavy swell made us roll our sides till we almost
dipped our bulwarks under--each time showers of spray being sent
dripping off them.  The enemy had made several shot-holes in our sides,
and those were now, we found, taking in the water faster than was
altogether agreeable.  The carpenter and his mates had indeed hard work
to stop them.  I have heard of people's hair turning white in a single
night.  I felt as if mine would, for it became doubtful if after all the
ship would swim, from the quantity of water she was taking in.  We,
indeed, had reason to regret that we had allowed the frigate to leave
us.  At last the morning broke.  We eagerly looked round the horizon.
No sail was in sight.  Would the ship float another day?  The shot-holes
had been stopped, but should bad weather again come on it would be
impossible to say what would be the effect on the vessel.  Noon came,
but no sail was in sight.  We were afraid that the cunning privateer had
led the frigate a long chase, perhaps among shoals and reefs, and that
she had got on shore, and that we might not see the frigate again.

"More likely that she was only the _Flying Dutchman_, taking a longer
cruise than usual," muttered Stubbs.  "There's no saying what tricks
that fellow is not up to."

"What, not got the _Dutchman_ out of your head yet, Stubbs?" said
Randolph.  "Why, Biddulph saw his brother on board, and two or three of
our people know the _Phoebe_, and recognised her."

"Yes, I know that's what often happens.  The _Dutchman_ can make his
ship look like any vessel he chooses," persisted Stubbs; "naturally--
that is to say as she generally appears--she is a curious old-fashioned
rigged craft--you may depend on that."

While we were speaking--taking a breath between our labours, for all
hands had been working hard--"A sail, a sail!" was shouted by one of the
seamen.  We all looked in the direction in which he pointed, and there
appeared the upper sails of a ship.  Our hopes made us believe that it
was the frigate.  "As likely the Frenchman come to finish us off, or
maybe only the _Flying Dutchman_ again," said Stubbs.  I thought that I
detected a gleam of humour in his eye, as if he was not quite so
credulous as he pretended to be.  As the stranger approached, the belief
that she was the _Phoebe_ gained ground.  At length those who knew her
best said that there was no doubt about the matter.  They were right.
Before dark she hove-to close to us, and a boat with a midshipman in her
boarded us.  The midshipman was my brother William.  He almost tumbled
back with surprise at seeing me, for he did not even know that I was
coming out.

"Why, James, where have you sprung from?" he exclaimed.  "I am thankful
to see you unhurt, for we have been anxious about you all day.  Couldn't
tell how much damage the rascal might have done you.  Well, he escaped
after all.  He has a fast pair of heels, indeed, and he led us a pretty
chase, till he got in among some reefs, on which we were nearly leaving
our bones.  We saw our danger, however, and by the time we were clear he
was out of sight."

The boat's crew were directed to remain on board to put the ship to
rights.  When, however, Captain Young found that this would occupy some
time, he offered to take us in tow.  A hawser was accordingly passed on
board, and away we went in the wake of the frigate.  Our course was for
the Isle of Bourbon, lately captured from the French.  At the end of a
week we anchored in the Bay of Saint Paul in that island.  On our way
there we had done our best to get the ship in order.  Our crew were now
set to work in earnest, aided by some of the men of the _Phoebe_, who
were kindly spared to us by her captain.  I took the opportunity of
seeing something of the island.  My brother William and some of the
other midshipmen of the _Phoebe_ got leave to accompany me, and merry
parties we had.

Bourbon is about one hundred and fifty miles in circumference, and rises
rapidly from the sea, forming one huge blunt-topped mountain in the
centre; indeed, the whole island is not unlike a big tea-cup in the
middle of the ocean, with some rather large cracks, however, in it.  It
is generally fertile, coffee and cotton being grown on it.  On the south
side, a few miles from the sea, there is a volcano, which grumbled and
growled, but seldom did more than send forth a little smoke.  The
inhabitants did not appear to be at all soured at having been placed
under British rule.

Probably, indeed, it was a matter of indifference to them, for they have
themselves sprung from a mixture of half the races under the sun.  Many
of the inhabitants are descended from some of those English pirates
whose headquarters were, for nearly a hundred years, on the island of
Madagascar, but who, about the middle of the seventeenth century,
growing weary of their lawless calling, settled here.  As their wives
were mostly from Madagascar, they are somewhat darkish, but not
bad-looking.  They are a lively, merry race, fond of dancing, and their
climate is delightful.  The names of some of the families belonging to
the island are derived from the English, as are those of several places.
I remember a bay in Madagascar, Antongil Bay, which clearly takes its
name from the well-known pirate-leader, Antony Gill, who robbed and
murdered on the high seas early in the seventeenth century.

A squadron and troops were collecting here, the latter under General
Abercrombie, for an expedition to the Mauritius.  We were greatly
disappointed, I must own, that our ship was not in a condition to
proceed to sea, or we should have been chartered to convey troops and
been witnesses of the triumphs we hoped they would achieve.  My object
is, however, to describe my own adventures in the pursuit of pacific
commerce.  I will thus only briefly say that the expedition arrived
speedily off the Mauritius, the troops were landed, and that after some
sharp fighting, by which we lost one hundred and fifty men killed and
wounded, the French General, De Caen, capitulated.  We had several sepoy
regiments, and the French general, in order to inspire the colonial
troops with contempt for them, publicly promised that whoever should
capture a sepoy should have him for a slave; but the militia appear to
have thought that by so doing they might possibly catch a Tartar, for
not a sepoy was made prisoner.

I made some satisfactory sales at Bourbon, and as soon as the ship was
repaired she followed the men-of-war to the Isle of France.  The island
is about thirty-five miles long, and one hundred and fifteen in
circumference, with a surface greatly diversified by hill and plain,
wood and plantation, with several considerable mountains, the chief of
which, Le Pouce and Pieter Botte, in the neighbourhood of Port Louis,
are well-known.  The harbour was a complete forest of masts, filled with
vessels of all sorts and sizes, from the huge line-of-battle ship to the
humble canoe, not unlike a butcher's tray, scooped out of a single log.
The British flag waved triumphantly on all the batteries; and Indiamen,
transport prizes, merchant craft of all descriptions, displayed English
colours, in most cases flying over the French.  Numerous boats, too,
were plying to and fro filled with naval and military officers, captains
of Indiamen, sailors, lascars, negroes, and Frenchmen, some on business,
some on pleasure, but all seeming to be in a hurry.  I looked out with
no little curiosity for any craft which might answer the description of
our late antagonist, the _Mignonne_.  If she had entered the harbour,
she had again escaped before the capture of the place, for she was
nowhere to be seen.  It would have been satisfactory to have seen our
friend caged, but it was too probable that he was still roving over the
ocean, on the watch to plunder any English craft he could venture to
attack.

The scene on shore was even more animated than on the water.  The
streets were crowded with people of many nations: naval and military
officers, English and French Government civilians, merchants and other
traders, Asiatics and negroes, almost naked slaves dragging along
horse-loads in carts, with mongrels of every shade of colour.  The town,
though in a bustle, was perfectly orderly; the shops were all open, and
their owners seemed to be driving a thriving trade, as were also the
keepers of taverns, which were full of visitors from fleet and camp.  We
fortunately had several articles among the cargo of the _Barbara_, of
which our countrymen were much in want, not to be found in the stores of
the place.  They were, however, quickly disposed of, and I was then at
leisure to amuse myself as I thought fit.  I made several excursions on
shore with my brother when he could get leave, and I had thus an
opportunity of learning the productions of the island.  The chief food
of the lower orders and slaves is yams and the _jatropha_, or cassada,
of which there are two species commonly known, the _jatropha janipha_,
and the _jatropha manihot_.  The former contains a strong vegetable
poison, which is destroyed by boiling; the latter is merely slightly
narcotic in its effects, and both are easily converted into wholesome
food.  The root, after being well washed and dried in the sun, is
usually scraped into a coarse powder, from which the juice is expressed:
it is then dried a second time and formed into thin cakes, very similar
in appearance to Scotch barley-cakes.  The bread thus made is called
manioc.  Tapioca is also a preparation of the root.  Plantains, bananas,
melons, and mangoes abound, and the last are especially fine.  The
climate is healthy, but the Mauritius is occasionally visited by
terrific hurricanes, which commit great damage both afloat and on shore.
We soon made friends among the French residents, and one of them, with
whom I had had some transactions, invited William and me, and a military
acquaintance, Captain Mason, to his house in the country.  We were most
hospitably entertained by our worthy host.  The house was large and
airy, with a verandah running round it on one side sufficiently broad to
enable us to sit out and enjoy the cool breeze, while we sipped our
coffee.  We had proposed returning that evening, but the wind got up, it
rained heavily, and became very dark.  Our host pressed us to stay, and
as William's leave extended to the next morning we accepted his
invitation, he undertaking to put my brother on board in time.  Our
companion, Captain Mason, was a quiet, amiable man.  He was married and
as he expected to remain on the island, he had, he told us, sent for his
wife from the Cape of Good Hope, where he had left her.  I cannot now
describe the incidents of our visit.

The next morning, soon after daybreak, having taken an early breakfast
of a lighter character than suited our English appetites, we drove back
to Port Louis.  The weather had grown worse instead of improving, and as
we drew near the town we saw in the distance two vessels with English
colours approaching the harbour.  William had to hurry on board his
ship, but Mason and I drove on to a spot where we could see them enter.
One gained an anchorage in safety, but the other still continued
outside, steering wildly, as if uncertain what course to take.  It was
soon evident that she was in great danger.  While we were looking on,
Captain Hassall joined us.  There were a number of naval officers,
masters of merchantmen, and others collected on the shore.  "She is said
to have a pilot on board, and an ignorant fellow he must be, or he would
have anchored outside ere this if he could not get in," observed Captain
Hassall.  While he was speaking, the vessel got into the swell of the
sea which was dashing on the rocks close at hand.  Rapidly she came
drifting towards them.  Probably the master then asserted his authority,
for two anchors were let go.  The fate of the ship, and probably of all
on board, depended on the anchors holding.  With deep anxiety we watched
her as the huge swells came rolling in towards the rocks.  A cry arose
from the collected crowd--"The cables have parted--the cables have
parted!"  The hapless craft was lifted by the next surge, and hurried on
amid the foaming breakers towards the rocks.  At that instant the
foresail was set, in the hopes of its helping to force her over them.
It was useless; down she came with a tremendous crash on the black
rocks.  For a few minutes she continued beating on them, rocking to and
fro in the wildest agitation; then a huge surge, which appeared to have
been for some time collecting its strength, struck her on the side, and
rolled her over, as if she had been merely a child's plaything, towards
the shore, to all appearance overwhelmed, so as never to rise again.
The wild breakers dashed triumphantly over her, but she was not
conquered, though it seemed a wonder that wood and iron should hold
together under the tremendous shocks she was receiving.  Once more she
rose to an erect position, and it was seen that her dauntless crew were
endeavouring to cut away her masts.  "It is the only thing they can do
to save their lives," observed Hassall, watching them through his glass.
"And see,--yes--there is a woman on board--a lady by her dress.  She is
clinging to the windlass--probably secured to it."  As he was speaking,
the mizen-mast came down, followed quickly by the mainmast, which
happily fell towards the shore.  Again a surge covered the vessel.  We
feared that all on board would be swept from the decks; but when again
the surge receded, the people were seen clinging fast as before.  A boat
from one of the men-of-war now approached the wreck, but the officer in
command soon saw that he should only throw away his own life and the
lives of those with him if he should attempt to go near enough to
receive any one on board.  The foremast now fell, and still the stout
ship hung together.  Other boats came up and got as near as it was
possible to go.  That those on board thought she would not hold together
much longer was evident by the efforts they began to make to escape.

First we observed a man descend the foremast as if with the intention of
swimming ashore.  His courage, however, forsook him; he paused and
returned.  Again he climbed along the mast, but hesitated--it was indeed
a desperate undertaking.  At length he cast himself into the water:
immediately he was overwhelmed.  Would he ever again reach the surface?
"Yes! yes! there he is," cried out several.  For a moment he was seen
struggling bravely.  A groan escaped from the spectators: "He's gone!
he's gone!"  "No, no, he is still floating," many shouted out.  So he
was; but whirled here and there, blinded and confused, he was unable to
guide himself.  He was seen, happily, from one of the boats: she dashed
forward, and he was hauled on board without apparently having struck a
rock.  All this time the people on the wreck had been watching him with
intense anxiety, especially the poor lady: "If a strong and bold swimmer
could scarcely be saved, what chance had she?"  Hassall made the remark.
"Not one would have a prospect of being saved if trusting only to his
own strength; but there is a Ruler above," said Captain Mason, who had
hitherto been watching the wreck without speaking; "He may save that
poor woman on the wreck as easily as the strongest seaman."  I have
often since thought of my friend's remark.  It is not our own right arm,
but God in heaven, without whose knowledge not a sparrow falls to the
ground, who preserves us in many dangers.  Captain Mason begged for the
use of Hassall's glass, and looked steadfastly through it at the wreck.
"It is impossible, yet the figure is like--I cannot make it out," I
heard him say.  The success of the first man induced another to attempt
reaching the shore.  He hurried along to the end of the mast and threw
himself into the water.  The boiling surges whirled him round and
round--now he was concealed by the foam--now he appeared struggling
onward--still it seemed scarcely possible that he could escape from the
boiling cauldron--just then a broken spar floated near him.  Had the end
struck him he must have been lost, but it came on so that he could
clutch the middle.  Tightly he grasped it till like his shipmate he was
floated near one of the boats and taken on board.  Two other men,
encouraged by the success of the first, attempted to reach the boats by
the same means, but scarcely had they committed themselves to the water
when a huge roller came roaring on, dashing over the ship, and as it
receded swept them off far away to sea; for a moment their forms were
seen struggling amidst the foam, and then they were hid for ever from
human eye.  The lives of the remainder on board seemed more than ever in
danger.  Should the storm increase, of which there seemed every
probability, the ship must go to pieces, even if they were not first
washed off the deck, and then what effort could save them?  I was more
than ever interested in their fate, when suddenly the idea occurred to
me that the lady on board might be the wife of my friend Mason.  I
thought that he had the same idea, though he would not allow himself to
entertain it, by the agitation he exhibited, and which he in vain tried
to control.  As yet the men who had been saved had not been brought on
shore.  More boats were coming down the harbour.  At length a fine
whale-boat was brought down not far from where we were standing.  A
naval officer, whose name I regret that I did not note, volunteered to
take the command, and to go alongside the wreck, if volunteers could be
found to man her.  Hassall at once offered his services, as did several
other masters of merchantmen standing by, and they were accepted.  Mason
and I also volunteered.  "Not unless you are seamen," was the answer.
"This work requires firm nerves and skilful hands."  I must observe here
that I have ever found the officers of the mercantile marine ready to go
forth, in spite of all dangers, to save the lives of their
fellow-creatures.  Though there are exceptions, the greater number are
as gallant fellows as any of those who have fought the battles of our
country.

The boat was manned and ready to go off, but it became a question
whether it would be wise to wait on the prospect of the sea going down,
or to risk all and to go off at once on the possibility of the gale
increasing.  The men who had been rescued were brought on shore.  Mason
hurried to them, and eagerly inquired who was the woman on board.  They
were common seamen, and did not know her name.  She was a lady, and had
come on board at Cape Town just as the ship was sailing.  That was all
they knew.  The naval officer had earnestly been watching the huge
rollers as they came tumbling on towards the shore.  Suddenly he cried
out, "Now, gentlemen, we'll be off."  Away went the boat amid the
foaming seas towards the hapless wreck.



CHAPTER SIX.

IN TROUBLED WATERS.

Hassall had left me his telescope.  I could see the people on board the
wreck stretching out their hands towards the boat as she left the shore
on her errand of mercy.  Mason every now and then asked for the glass
and looked towards the wreck.  He seemed more and more convinced that
the lady on board was his wife.  Yet could he do nothing?  Yes, he
could.  Though he could not exert his body I saw that he was doing all
that man in his utmost extremity can do.  His lips were moving, his head
was bent forward, his eyes glancing at times at the boat and the ship,
his hands were clasped tightly in prayer, forgetful of the crowds
surrounding him.  The boat, impelled by lusty strokes, darted on.  She
reached the wreck.  The lady was lifted in.  No one seemed inclined to
follow.  The danger was fearful.  Not before, since she struck, had one
of the huge rollers failed at much shorter intervals to dash over and
over the ship.  Should one of them overtake the boat her fate would be
sealed.  On came the boat towards the beach.  A number of seamen rushed
down into the surf to receive her and haul her up as soon as she should
touch the sand.  The excitement among the crowd was tremendous.  Far off
I saw one of these huge billows rushing onwards.  If it broke before the
boat could reach the beach it would overwhelm her.  The least excited of
the crowd, to all appearance, was my friend Captain Mason.  He advanced
slowly towards the spot which it seemed probable the boat would reach,
then he stopped for a moment.  On she came, her keel grated on the sand,
sturdy shoulders bore her along upwards, and ere the coming roller burst
she was safe beyond its reach.  The lady lay almost overcome in the
stern sheets.  Mason uttered his wife's name, she looked up, and in
another moment she was placed in his arms.  A communication was
afterwards established between the wreck and the shore, and most of the
crew landed before the gale again came down with redoubled fury.  By the
morning scarce a vestige of the ship remained.  I had the pleasure of
seeing Mrs Mason completely recovered two days afterwards, and thankful
for her providential escape.

My brother William got leave of absence for three or four days, and he
was anxious to spend the time in a cruise along the coast, and to get me
to accompany him.  I had wound up my mercantile business at the place,
but as the _Barbara_ would be detained a few days longer to complete her
repairs, in a weak moment I consented to his proposal, as if we had not
enough knocking about on salt water in the pursuit of our professional
duties.  It is difficult to put old heads on young shoulders.  We did
not remember that it was still the stormy season, and that the natives
might not be so inclined to be civil to us, their late conquerors,
coming in a half-decked boat with fowling-pieces, as they would had we
appeared under the protection of the frigate's guns.

We agreed that it would be as well to have companions.  I asked
O'Carroll, who was very ready to come, and William brought a friend,
whom he introduced as "My messmate, Toby Trundle."  His name was a
curious one--at first I did not suppose that it was anything but a
nickname--and he himself was one of the oddest little fellows I ever
met.  From the first glance I had of him, I fancied that he was rather a
young companion for my brother, but a second look showed me that he was
fully his age.  We had hired a craft, a schooner-rigged, half-decked
boat, about five-and-twenty feet long, with a well aft, in which we
could sit comfortably enough.  She was not a bad boat for smooth water,
but if caught in a heavy sea, very likely to drown all on board.

Our crew consisted of a Frenchman, Paul Jacotot, the owner of the
_Dore_, as our craft was called, his son Auguste, a boy of thirteen, and
Jack Nobs, a boy I brought from the _Barbara_.  The Frenchman was to act
as pilot and cook.  The boys were to scrape the potatoes--or rather
prepare the yams, for we had none of the former root--and tend the
head-sheets.  A boatswain's mate, Sam Kelson, who had been in hospital,
had been allowed to accompany the midshipmen before returning on board.
The two midshipmen were to act as officers.  O'Carroll, whom they did
not know was a sailor, and I, were to be passengers, and the rest of the
party were rated as crew.  We had laid in all sorts of provisions, an
ample supply for the few days we were to be away.  Port Louis, it must
be remembered, is on the north side of the island, and we had agreed to
make our cruise to the eastward, where there are some small islands--
Gunners Coin and Flat Island.  If the wind should prove favourable we
hoped to circumnavigate the island.  With a fair breeze off the land,
and Le Pouce seen standing up astern beyond the town, we sailed out of
the harbour, the weather being as fine as heart could desire.  William
and Toby Trundle took it by turns to steer, Jacotot pointing out the
dangers to be avoided, for we kept close in shore for the sake of the
scenery.  Toby Trundle sat aft steering, looking, in a broad-brimmed
straw hat, a white jacket and trowsers, contrasting with his sunburnt
complexion, more like a monkey than a midshipman.  Jacotot, when not
engaged in any culinary matter below, was jabbering away at a rapid rate
to us, if we would listen; if not, he was addressing his son, whom he
kept constantly on the move, now scolding, now praising with terms of
tender endearment.

We enjoyed ourselves, and lunched and dined with great contentment,
voting Jacotot a first-rate _chef_, which he undoubtedly was.  He was,
however, a better cook than seaman we before long discovered.

"The next prize we take I hope that we shall find some cooks on board;
we must secure one for our mess," observed Toby, helping himself to one
of the dishes Jacotot had sent aft.  I had not been long on board before
I found out, what seemed to have escaped the midshipmen's observation
when they hired the boat, that the rigging was sadly rotten, and that
she herself was in a somewhat leaky condition.  They, however, only
laughed at the leaking.  "It will keep the boat sweet, and give Jack
Nobs and Auguste something to do," observed Master Trundle, cocking his
eye at me.  Notwithstanding this, we stood on, the breeze shifting
conveniently in our favour till nightfall, when we put into a small
harbour, the entrance to which our pilot for a wonder knew.  The next
day we continued our course, landing in a bay, up which we ran to have a
look at the country, and to get some goat's milk and fruit.  We found a
small farm, the only white people being an old-fashioned Frenchman, with
a somewhat dingy wife, and two grown-up daughters.  All the rest of the
people were either brown Orientals or black Africans.  The old Frenchman
was very civil, merely shrugged his shoulders when he saw our flag, and
observed that it was the fortune of war, and that, as we were the most
numerous, France had lost no honour, though she lost the dependency.  He
supplied us for a trifle with a bottle of goat's milk, and as many
melons, pines, and mangoes as we could manage to eat.  He politely
assisted in taking them down to the boat.  As he did so he looked round
the horizon seaward, and up at the sky.  "Messieurs will do well to
remain at anchor for a few hours longer," he observed.  "We are going to
have a change of weather.  It may be slight, or it may be very great,
and you will be more content on shore than at sea."  We thanked him for
his advice, but the midshipmen asserting that if we stopped they might
not be able to rejoin their ship at the right time, it was disregarded.
On standing out again, however, we saw that the hope of getting round
the island was vain, and that our surest course would be to return by
the way we had come.  The weather soon changed; ugly clouds collected
and came sweeping up from the west and south, though as yet but little
wind filled our sails.

"I am afraid that we are going to have a storm," I observed.

"Oh, no fear; I don't think that there will be anything in it," answered
Toby Trundle.

"I think that there'll be a great deal in it, and I would advise you
gentlemen to make the best of your way back to the bay we have just
left," said O'Carroll.

The midshipmen looked at him as much as to say, What do you know about
the matter?  Jacotot was too busy cooking an omelette to attend to the
weather, or he should have warned us.  The question was settled by a
sudden gust which came off the land, and laid the boat on her beam-ends.
I thought we were going to capsize, and so we should, but crack away
went both our masts, and the boat righted, one-third full of water.  We
all looked at each other for a moment aghast.  It was a mercy that no
one was washed overboard.  A second and stronger gust followed the
first, and on drove the boat helplessly before it.  "You'll pump and
bale out the water, and get on board the wreck of the masts," said
O'Carroll, quietly.

We followed his advice as best we could.  Jacotot, who was attending to
his little stove below when the squall struck us, popped up his head
with his white nightcap on, and his countenance so ludicrously
expressive of dismay that, in spite of the danger we were in, Trundle
burst into a fit of laughter.  The Frenchman had not time to get out
before the vessel righted.  He now emerged completely, and frantically
seizing his cap, tore it off his head and threw it into the boiling
water.  He then joined in hauling on board the wreck of the rigging.

"If we are to save our lives we must forthwith rig a jury-mast, so as to
keep the boat before the gale," observed O'Carroll.

With the aid of a wood-axe we knocked out the stump of the foremast, and
making a fresh heel to the broken spar, managed, in spite of the rolling
of the boat, to slip it into its place.  This was done not a moment too
soon.  The wind increased so rapidly, and blew with such fearful
violence, that we should have been unable to accomplish the task, though
as yet there was not much sea.

O'Carroll showed that he was a man for an emergency.  "This will be more
than a gale," he observed; "it will be a regular hurricane! we may
expect that.  But still, if we manage properly, we may save our lives."

Close-reefing the foresail, we got it ready to hoist as a square sail;
the rest of the spars we lashed fore and aft on either side, while we
cut up the mainsail and raised the gunwale a foot or more all round to
help keep out the water.  We also, as far as we could, covered in the
after-part of the little craft.  While we were thus engaged the boys
were pumping and baling.  This task was scarcely accomplished before the
wind had blown us helplessly so far off the land that we became exposed
to the full violence of the sea, which had rapidly risen.  The water was
leaping on every side tumultuously--the foam flying in thick masses off
it--each sea, as it rose high above our heads, threatening to overwhelm
us.

We gazed wistfully at the land which we had so unwisely left, but we had
no power of returning there.  Our only prospect of passing amidst the
heavy seas now rolling around us was to hoist our sail and scud before
the wind.

O'Carroll now took the helm.  "I have had more experience in these seas
than you, young gentlemen, and the slightest want of care may send such
a craft as this to the bottom!" he observed.

Without a word, they set to work to pump and bale.  Even Trundle grew
serious.  Jacotot every now and then stopped pumping or baling, or
whatever he was about, and pulled his hair, and made a hideous face,
scolded Auguste, telling him to _depechez vites_, and then set to work
himself harder than ever.  The English seamen worked away without saying
a word beyond what was absolutely necessary.  Jack Nobs behaved very
well, but cried in sympathy when Auguste was scolded.  The latter always
blubbered on till his father ceased speaking.  I could not help
remarking what I have described, notwithstanding the fearful danger we
were running.  The sky was of an almost inky hue, while the sea was of
the colour of lead, frosted over with the driving spray torn off from
the summits of the tossing seas by the fury of the wind.  Our stump of a
mast, as well as our sail, had been well secured, though I dreaded every
instant to see the ring-bolts, to which the ropes had been made fast,
dragged out of the sides, and the rotten boat torn to pieces.

Thus on we flew, right into the Indian Ocean, though in what direction
we could only guess, for our compass, like everything belonging to the
craft, was defective.  Intending only to make a coasting trip, we had no
chart, except one of the island from which we were now being driven
rapidly away.  To be in a gale of wind on board a stout ship in the open
sea, is a fine thing once in one's life, but to have to sit in a rotten
boat, with a hurricane driving her, one knows not where, across the
ocean, is a very different matter.  Our only prospect of saving our
lives, humanly speaking, was to keep the boat dead before the wind; a
moment's careless steering might have caused our destruction.

We were all so busy in pumping or baling that we had no time to watch
each other's countenances, or we might have seen alarm and anxiety
depicted on them as the rising seas came following up astern,
threatening to engulf us.  I felt for the young brother who was with me,
so lighthearted and merry, and yet so little prepared for the eternity
into which any moment we might be plunged.  After fervent inward prayer,
my own mind was comforted, so much so that I was able to speak earnest
words, not only to my young brother, but to the others.  Trundle and
Jack looked very serious, but rather bewildered, as if they could not
comprehend what was said.

Such is, I fear, too often the case under such circumstances.  I
remembered how, a few days before, I had seen Mason praying at a time of
the utmost extremity, and I urged my companions to pray for themselves.
Jacotot was the only person who seemed averse to listen to the word of
truth.  Though he had raged and pulled his hair with grief at the injury
done to his vessel, he could not bring himself to care for anything
beyond the passing moment.  But while the rest grew calm and resigned,
he became more and more agitated and alarmed.  In each sea which rolled
up after us in the distance he saw the messenger which was to summon him
to destruction.  Poor little Auguste could only cry with fear of the
undefined.  He had never been taught to believe in anything, and thus he
could not even believe in the reality of death till he was in its grasp.

Under the circumstances in which we were placed, people can talk but
little, though the thoughts crowd through the mind with frightful
rapidity.  Unless when occupied, we for most of the time sat silent,
watching the ocean.  Night was coming on, and the fury of the tempest
had in no way decreased.  It was difficult to steer in the daytime--it
was doubly difficult and dangerous at night.  After O'Carroll had been
steering for some time, Trundle begged that he might again take the
helm.

"Trust me," he said, "I have been in a gale of wind in an open boat
before now, and know how to steer carefully."

"But you've not steered in a hurricane in the Indian seas, Mr Trundle,"
answered O'Carroll.  "Any moment the wind may shift round, and if we
were to be taken aback, it would be all over with us.  As long as I can
keep my eyes open I'll stay where I am, if you please."  And O'Carroll
was as good as his word; hour after hour he sat there, as we rushed on
up and down the watery hills through the pitchy darkness--it was indeed
a long, long night.  Though we had eaten nothing since the hurricane
came on, we were all of us rather weary than hungry.  As for sleepiness,
that was very far from any one.  When compelled to rest, we could employ
our thoughts in little else than wishing for daylight, and hoping that
the storm would soon cease.  It was a relief to be called on to pump or
bale, for the increasing leaks required three of us at a time to be
actively engaged in both operations.  But I am wrong in saying that I
could think of nothing except my own fearful peril.  Frequently I
thought of my dear mother and other loved ones at home.  The thought
gave me comfort and courage, and cheered me up through the horrors of
the night.  Daylight came at last, and revealed the tumultuous ocean on
every side, but not a speck of land was visible.  Trundle was the first
to exclaim that he was hungry; but to light a fire was almost
impossible, and even Jacotot could not have cooked by it had it been
lighted.  We managed, however, to serve out some bread and the old
Frenchman's fruit to all hands, and then we had to turn to and clear the
craft of water, which was finding its way in through every seam.  It
seemed scarcely possible that she could float much longer, should the
hurricane continue, with the violent working to which we were exposed.
Had we been stationary, the tempest would have passed over us; but
driven along with it, we had for a much longer time to endure its fury.
It seemed, indeed, surprising that the boat should have floated so long.
As far as we depended, indeed, on our own exertions, the most careful
steering could alone have saved us.  We had been longing for daylight;
now that it had come, the dangers of our condition appeared more
evident, and we almost wished again for night.  We could not calculate,
either, in what direction we were being driven, but we feared it might
be where rocks and coral banks and islets abound, and that at any moment
we might be hurled on one of them.  O'Carroll still sat at his post.  I
asked if he did not feel tired.  "Maybe, but till the gale is over, here
I'll stick!" he answered.  "And sure it's as pretty a sample of a
hurricane as any of you'll be after wishing to see for many a day to
come."

At length, towards noon, the wind began to fall, and in a very short
time, though it still blew hard, and the sea ran almost as high as
before, and was consequently as dangerous, it was evident that the
hurricane was over.  Our hopes revived.  Still, we were obliged to run
on before the wind; and to avoid the danger of being pooped by the
quickly-following sea, we had to hoist more of our sail: indeed, we now
dreaded not having wind enough to avoid the sea.  Thus passed the day,
and before nightfall we were rolling on a tolerably smooth swell with a
moderate breeze.  Still we had to exert ourselves as before to keep the
boat afloat.  The moment, however, that one of us was relieved at the
pump or baling bucket, he dropped off to sleep.  I was even afraid, at
first, that we should all go to sleep together.  Nothing, indeed, for
some hours could rouse up the two boys.  My young brother and Trundle
were, however, after a short snooze, as lively as ever, and as merry
too.  Midshipmen-like, they did not seem to trouble themselves about the
future.  I, however, still felt very anxious about it.  The Southern
Cross and many another bright constellation not long familiar to my eyes
were shining forth in the clear sky.  Had we known our position, even
though we had no compass, we might have shaped a course for the
Mauritius.  We calculated that we had been driven two hundred miles away
from it in the direction of the equator.  Should we steer south we were
as likely to miss as to find it.  We proposed, therefore, to steer to
the west, knowing that we must thus reach some part of the coast of
Madagascar, where the English had at that time a fort and a garrison.
"But we must have our craft rigged before we talk of the course we'll
steer," observed O'Carroll, who at that moment awoke from a long sleep.
With the morning light we set to work to fit a mainmast, and to rig the
boat as best we could.  There was a light breeze, but as it was from the
west we lay without any canvas set.

While all hands were busily employed fitting the rigging, I looked up
and saw a brig under all sail approaching us at no great distance.
Beyond her was another vessel, a ship--I pointed her out.  O'Carroll
took the telescope.

"She's an English vessel chased by an enemy," he observed.  "She'll not
stop to help us, so the closer we lie the better."  He kept after this
continually taking up the glass for some time, when suddenly he
exclaimed, "As I'm an Irishman, it's that villain La Roche again!"

His countenance fell as he spoke.  He handed me the glass--I took a
steady look at the ship, and had little doubt that it was our old
antagonist the _Mignonne_ in sight.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

"BREAKERS AHEAD!"

Our chief hope of escaping an unpleasant examination by the pirate
existed in the possibility that we had not been observed from her deck.
Had we had any sail set we could not fail to have been so.  Not, we
knew, that so small a craft as ours would be considered worth
overhauling; but in case we might give information of the pirate's
whereabouts, it might be thought expedient to put us out of the way.  So
we feared.  We therefore watched the progress of the _Mignonne_ and the
brig with intense interest, earnestly hoping that the latter would lead
the pirate a long chase before she was captured, if she could not escape
altogether, which of course we hoped she would.  La Roche had certainly
managed to inspire O'Carroll with an extraordinary dread and hatred of
him, for brave and calm in danger as our friend had lately shown himself
to be, he was now completely unnerved, and I saw him crouching down in
the boat as if, even had she been seen, he could have been
distinguished.  On sailed the brig; gradually her sails began to
disappear below the horizon.  The pirate still continued the chase.  For
some time no one in the boat thought of working.  We were roused up by
finding that the water was rapidly gaining on us, and we all had to turn
to and pump and bale harder than ever.  We were in hopes that after all
the brig might escape, when the boom of a gun came over the water,
followed by another and another.  It was too probable that the pirate
had got her within range.  Both vessels had now disappeared below the
horizon, at the same time the wind where we were had completely died
away.  As far as the pirate was concerned, we began to breathe more
freely; it was not likely that he would again pass near us.  But the sun
shone forth from the clear sky with intense heat, roasting our heads and
the brains within them, and making whatever pitch remained between the
planks of our deck bubble up as if it had been boiling.  There we lay,
our boat rolling from side to side, without a particle of shade to
shelter us.  Our little cabin was like an oven.  When we were to rest it
became simply a question whether in making the attempt we should be
roasted on deck or baked below.  We had not much time for idleness yet:
though we worked very hard, it was not till nightfall that our rigging
was set up sufficiently to enable us to make sail.

When the sun set there was not a breath of air, while the surface of the
ocean was as smooth as a sheet of glass, though every now and then a
swell rose under the boat's keel, making her roll for ten minutes
afterwards, while it glided slowly away in the distance.  The only
sounds were the clank of the pump and the dash of water from the
scuppers or buckets, and an occasional snort of some huge fish, or the
splash it made when plunging down into its liquid home.  Thus the hours
of the night passed away.  We were so weary and sleepy that the instant
we were relieved from the pump we lay down and were lost in
forgetfulness.  The day broke, the sun rose higher and higher, and beat
hotter and hotter, and all around us was the same smooth, glassy ocean.
Now and then the surface was broken by a flight of flying fish as they
rose out of it and darted along through the air, glittering bright in
the sunbeams, like a covey of silver birds.

"Ah, now! if some of you would just have the goodness to come aboard
here, you would serve us nicely for breakfast," exclaimed Trundle, as he
observed them.

He had scarcely spoken when upwards of a dozen out of a large shoal
leaped, or flew rather, right in among us, while as many more passed
clean over the boat.  It was a curious coincidence, and at all events
afforded us not only a substantial, but a very delicious meal, cooked by
the skilful hands of Monsieur Jacotot.  It put us all in good spirits,
and we began to look at the future in a tolerably hopeful spirit, till
my midshipman brother exclaimed--

"I say, if this sun lasts much longer, what shall we do for grub?  The
sea-pie we have brought has gone bad, and I am afraid that the beef and
pork won't keep good many hours out of the brine."

"You may put them in the past instead of the future tense, my boy,"
observed Trundle, who had been examining the lockers; "I doubt if any
stomach with less powers than a shark's could swallow a bit of the meat
we have got on board."

"Then on what have we got to exist till we can reach the shore?"  I
asked, with a feeling of serious anxiety.

"Why," answered William, "we have biscuits and half a cheese--at least
we had half when we sailed, but it is rather gone--and a few mangoes,
and bananas, and plantains, and a melon or two, and some tea and coffee,
and sugar.  I am afraid we haven't much else, except a cask of water,
and that was rather leaky, like this craft."

"Then let us look to the cask, gentlemen," said O'Carroll.  "And don't
throw the meat away, putrid though it may be.  The Frenchman may cook it
so as to make it go down, and we don't know how hard we may be pressed
for food."

The water-cask was examined, happily not altogether too late, but a
third of the precious liquid had run out.  I said nothing, but sad
forebodings filled my mind.  Even with a compass to steer by and a good
breeze to carry us along, we might be several days reaching Port Louis,
or, indeed, any habitable coast we could make.  We might be kept out
much longer, and then how could we exist?  We could scarcely hope that
another covey of flying fish would come on board, though we might catch
some others if we could manufacture hooks, for I was afraid we had none
on board.  This calm might continue for a week, and then we might have
another gale, for we were in the hurricane season.  I advised that we
should at once go on an allowance of food and water, a suggestion which
was, of course, adopted.  We had no fishing lines or hooks on board; a
bit of an old file was, however, discovered, and with it and a hammer
Jacotot undertook to make some hooks, while Kelson spun some fine yarn
for lines.

"I shall have plenty of time," observed the Frenchman, with a wan smile
and a shrug of the shoulders, "for without the fish I shall have nothing
to cook."

Two days passed, and though the hooks were in use we caught nothing, and
some of the party began to wish that the pirate had picked us up.  Two
days more passed: matters had become very serious.  Hunger was gnawing
at our insides, and what seemed even worse, thirst was parching our lips
and throats.  With the intense heat we were enduring, gallons of water
would scarcely have satisfied us, and we each had but a small wineglass
full three times a day.  When that was gone, as long as our fuel lasted
we could get a little water by condensing the steam from our kettle.
Our thirst became intolerable; yet the few drops, we did get kept us, I
believe, alive.  I do not wish to dwell on that time.  My own sufferings
were great, but they were increased by seeing those of my young brother
and his lighthearted companion, both of them about, as I feared, to pass
away from the world they had found so enjoyable.  The sun rose, and set,
and rose again, and each day it appeared to send down its heat with an
increased intensity of strength as we grew weaker and weaker.  A new
danger threatened us: we could even now scarcely keep the boat clear of
water; should our strength fail altogether, as seemed but too probable,
she would sink below us.  Our lot was that which many poor seamen have
endured, but that did not make it more supportable to us.

Our last particle of food had been eaten, the last drop of water nearly
exhausted.  The strongest might endure for a day or two, the weakest
ones must sink within a few hours.  Even O'Carroll, strong as he seemed,
was giving way.  He sat dull and unconscious, his eyes meaningless, only
arousing himself by a great effort.  My brother's head rested on my arm,
and I was moistening his lips with the few drops obtained from the cask.
Suddenly Kelson, who had been gazing round the horizon, started up,
crying out, "A breeze! a breeze!  I see it coming over the water!"

I turned my eyes to the west, the direction to which he pointed.  There
I saw a dark-blue line quickly advancing towards us.  Even already, on
either side, cat's-paws were to be seen just touching the surface, then
vanishing again, once more to appear in a different direction as the
light currents of air, precursors of the main body of the wind, touched
the surface.  The effect on our fainting party was magical; even the
poor boys tried to lift up their languid eyes to look around.  Another
shout from Kelson a few minutes afterwards roused us all still more.  "A
sail! a sail!  She's standing this way too!"

Even Jacotot, who had completely given way to despair, started to his
feet at the sound, and, weak though he was, performed such strange
antics expressive of his joy on the little deck that I thought he would
have gone overboard.

"If you've got all that life in you, Mounseer, just turn to at the pump
again and make some use of it, instead of jigging away like an overgrown
jackanapes!" growled out Kelson, who held the poor Frenchman in great
contempt for having knocked under, as he called it, so soon.

Jacotot gave another skip or two, and then, seizing the pump-handle, or
break, as it is called, burst into tears.  The two midshipmen and boys
soon relapsed into their former state, while O'Carroll seemed to forget
that relief was approaching, till on a sudden the idea seized him that
the stranger which was now rapidly nearing us was no other than the
_Mignonne_, though she had been last seen in an opposite direction, and
there had been a dead calm ever since.  "Arrah! we'll all be murdered
entirely by that thief of the world, La Roche, bad luck to him!" he
cried out, wringing his hands.  "It was an unlucky day that I ever cast
eyes on his ugly face for the first time, and now he's after coming back
again to pick me up in the middle of the Indian Ocean, just as a big
black crow does a worm out of a turnip-field!"

In vain I tried to argue him out of the absurdity of his notion.  He
turned sharply round on me.

"It's desaving me now ye are, and that isn't the part of a true friend,
Mr James Braithwaite!" he exclaimed.  "Just try how he'll treat you,
and then tell me how you like his company."

I saw that there was not the slightest use reasoning with him, but that
it would be necessary to watch him, lest in his frenzy he should jump
overboard.  As the dreadful idea came on me that he might do so, I saw
the black fin of the seaman's sworn foe, a shark, gliding toward us, and
a pair of sharp eyes looking wistfully up towards me, so I fancied, as
if the creature considered the leaky boat and its contents a dainty dish
prepared for his benefit.  It made me set to work to bale with all the
strength I could muster.  Seeing me so employed, O'Carroll for a moment
forgot his mad idea, and followed my example.  Often and often I turned
my gaze towards the approaching ship.  It seemed even still open to
doubt whether she would pass near enough to observe us.

At length the breeze reached us, and hoisting our sails as well as our
strength would allow, we stood in a direction to come across the course
the stranger was steering.  I told Kelson, in a whisper, to assist me in
keeping a watch on O'Carroll, for as we drew nearer the stranger, so did
his uneasiness increase, and he was evidently still under the impression
that she was the dreaded _Mignonne_.  William and Trundle looked at her
with lack-lustre eyes.  I asked Kelson what he thought she was.  "A
small Chinaman, or a store-ship, maybe, sir," he answered.  "She's
English, certainly, by the cut of her sails."

"You hear what he says," I observed to O'Carroll.  "I think the same
myself.  We shall be treated as friends when we get on board."

"Ye are after desaving me, I know ye are," cried the poor fellow,
turning round and giving a reproachful glance at me.  "Don't ye see the
ugly villain La Roche himself standing on the cathead ready to order his
crew of imps to fire as soon as we get within range of their guns?"

This notion so tickled Kelson's fancy that he fairly burst into a fit of
laughter, in which I and the rest of the party faintly joined, from very
weakness, for most of them had not heard what was said.  Even O'Carroll
himself imitated us.  Suddenly he stopped.  "It's no laughing matter,
though, let me tell you," he observed gravely, after some time had
elapsed, and the stranger had neared us so that we could see the people
on deck.  "But where's La Roche?  Oh, I see, he's aft there, grinning at
us as usual."  He pointed to a most respectable-looking old gentleman,
who was, I supposed, the master of the ship.

"You are mistaken in that," said I, feeling the importance of keeping
him quiet till he could be got on board.  "If that is the _Mignonne_,
she has been captured, and is in possession of a British crew.  You'll
see that I am right directly."

The ship was shortening sail as I spoke.  We were soon alongside.  Even
at a distance our pitiable condition had been observed.  We were one
after the other hoisted on deck, for even Kelson could scarcely get up
without help.  I gave a hint to the doctor to look after O'Carroll.  "I
am right," I remarked to my friend.  "If La Roche is on board, he is
safe under hatches; so the best thing you can do is to turn in, and go
to sleep.  You want rest more than any of us."

Led by the surgeon, he went quietly below, and I hoped with soothing
medicine and sleep would be soon all to rights again.

The ship proved to be, not what Kelson had supposed, but a vessel with
free emigrants bound out to the rising town of Sydney, in New South
Wales--a colony generally called Botany Bay, established some few years
before, by Captain Phillips of the navy, chiefly with convicts and the
necessary soldiers to look after them.  We had just told our tale, and
the passengers had expressed their sympathy for us, when I heard Jacotot
give a loud cry of dismay.  On looking over the side the cause was
explained--the masts of our unhappy little craft were just disappearing
under the surface.  This was the natural consequence of our neglecting
to pump her out, and the ship, which was going ahead, dragging her
through the water, when of course it rushed in through her open seams
with redoubled speed.  Poor Jacotot tore his hair and wrung his hands,
and wept tears of grief for his wretched craft; but he did not gain as
much sympathy as would have been shown him had he been more quiet,
though our new friends congratulated us the more warmly in having got
out of her before she met her fate.  Food and rest quickly set most of
us to rights, and the following day William and Trundle and I were able
to take our places at the cabin table with the rest of the passengers.
O'Carroll was kept in bed with fever, though he had got over his idea
that La Roche was on board.  The old gentleman he had mistaken for him
proved to be a minister of the gospel, who had been invited to accompany
a party of the emigrants.

We found that things were not going on in at all a satisfactory way on
board.  The master had died before the ship reached the Cape: the first
officer, Mr Gregson, who had now charge, was obstinate and
self-opinionated when sober, and he was very frequently intoxicated; the
second was a stupid fellow and no navigator; and both were jealous of
the third, who was a superior, intelligent young man, and in numerous
ways they did their utmost to annoy him.  This accounted for the good
ship, the _Kangaroo_, being very much out of her proper course, which
was far to the southward of where she picked us up.  Most disastrous
consequences were to occur.  William and Trundle told me that they had
been making their observations; that they wondered how the ship had got
thus far, and that they should be much surprised if she got much
farther.  A very large proportion of the ships cast away and lives
sacrificed are so in consequence of the habitual intoxication of the
masters and their officers.  I venture to make this distinct assertion
from the very numerous instances I have known and heard of.  We did not
wish to alarm the passengers, none of whom had been at sea before, and
were not aware of the danger they were running.  Had our schooner still
floated, I should have proposed taking her to the first island we could
make and there repairing her.  We asked Mr Gregson if he would
undertake to land us at Port Louis, offering him at the same time
payment if he would do so; but he positively refused, declaring that
nothing should induce him to go out of his course, and that we must
stick to the ship and work our passage till she reached her destination.

Believing that, as he was short-handed, his object in detaining us was
to get more hands to work the ship, this we positively refused to do.
"Very well, then, we'll see who is master on board the _Kangaroo_," he
replied, with an oath.  "You tell me that three of you belong to a
man-of-war; but I find you in a French boat, and how do I know that you
are not deserters or convicts? and I'll treat you as such if you don't
look out."  This conduct was so unexpected, and so different from the
kind way in which we had been treated by the passengers, that we did not
know what to say.  We agreed to wait till we could consult O'Carroll;
and Trundle undertook to get a look at the chart the captain was using,
and to try and find out where he had placed the ship.  The wind had
hitherto continued very light, so that we had made but little way since
we came on board.  The day following the unpleasant conversation I have
described, O'Carroll was so much recovered that he was able to come on
deck.  Though Irishmen have not the character in general of being good
seamen, I considered from what I had seen of him that he was an
exception to the general rule.  I told him what we had remarked.

"When the time comes I'll see what I can do," he answered; "but it is
ticklish work interfering with such fellows as the present master of
this ship, unless one advises the very thing one does not want done."

"We may soon require the exercise of your skill," I remarked.  "It
appears to me that there will speedily be a change in the weather."

"Little doubt about that, and we shall have it hot and strong again
soon," he answered, looking round the horizon.

"Not another hurricane, I hope," said I.

"Not quite sure about that," he answered.  "Were I master of this ship I
should make all snug for it; but if I were to advise Gregson to do so,
he'd only crack on more sail to show his superior seamanship.  I've had
a talk with the surgeon, McDow, a very decent sort of young fellow, and
so I know the man we have to deal with."

An hour or two after this, the wind had increased to half a gale, and
the _Kangaroo_ was tearing away through the sea with a great deal more
sail than a prudent seaman would have carried.  Unfortunately William or
Trundle had remarked that it was much more important to shorten sail on
the appearance of bad weather on board a short-handed merchantman, than
on board a man-of-war with a strong crew.  I saw O'Carroll looking
anxiously aloft, and then again to windward.  At last he could stand it
no longer.

"You'll let the wind take the topmasts out of the ship if you don't look
out, Captain Gregson," he remarked.

"What business have you to come aboard this ship and to pretend to teach
me?" answered the master, who was more than half drunk.  "If you do,
take care.  I'll turn you out of her, and let you find your own way
ashore."

While he was speaking a loud crack was heard, and the mizen-topmast was
carried over the side.  This made him order the crew aloft to shorten
sail.  "You go too, you lazy youngsters!" he exclaimed, seeing William
and Trundle on deck.

They sprung up the rigging without a word of reply.  I watched them with
great anxiety, for the masts bent like whips, and I was afraid every
moment to see the main share the fate of the mizen-mast, to the
destruction of all on the yards.  Still the master, as if indifferent to
what might happen, was not even looking aloft.  The two midshipmen had
just reached the top, and were about to lie along the yard, when
O'Carroll shouted: "Down, all of you; down, for your lives!"

His voice arrested their progress, and two of the men already on the
yards sprang back into the top; but the warning came too late for the
rest.  A tremendous squall struck the ship.  Over she heeled, till the
lee bulwarks were under water.  A loud crash followed.  Away went the
main-topmast, and yard, and struggling sail, carrying six human beings
with it.  Five were hurled off into the now foaming sea.  We saw them
for an instant stretching out their arms, as if imploring that help
which it was beyond our power to give.  The ship dashed onward, leaving
them far astern.  One still clung to the rigging towing with the spar
alongside.  The ship still lay almost on her beam-ends.

O'Carroll saw the possibility of saving the poor fellow.  Calling out to
me to lay hold of a rope, one end of which he fastened round his waist,
he plunged overboard.  I could scarcely have held it, had not William
and Trundle with Kelson come to my assistance.  O'Carroll grasped the
man.  "Haul away!" he shouted.  In another instant he was on board
again, with the man in his arms.  The helm was put up, the ship righted,
the man had got off the foreyard, and away the ship new, with the
fore-topsail wildly bulging out right before the wind.  In a few minutes
it was blown from the bolt-ropes in strips, twisted and knotted
together.  The mainsail, not without difficulty, was handed, and we
continued to run on under the foresail, the only other sail which
remained entire, and it seemed very probable that that would soon be
blown away.

All this time the terror of the unfortunate passengers was very great--
the more so that it was undefined.  They saw the captain, however, every
now and then come into the cabin and toss off a tumbler of strong
rum-and-water, and then return on deck, and shout out with oaths often
contradictory orders.  The gale all this time was increasing, until it
threatened to become as violent as the hurricane from which we had
escaped.  I could not help wishing that we had not left our leaky little
schooner.  We might have reached some land in her.  Now we did not know
where we were going, except towards a region of rocks and sandbanks on
which any moment the ship might be hurled.  For ourselves it would be
bad enough; but hard indeed for the poor women and children, of whom
there were a dozen or more on board, several of them helpless infants.

As I looked on the man who was thus perilling the lives of his
fellow-creatures by his senseless brutality, I could not help thinking
what a load of guilt rested on his head.  His face was flushed, his
features distorted, his eyes rolling wildly, as he walked with irregular
steps up and down the deck, or ever and anon descended to the cabin to
gaze stupidly at his chart, which was utterly useless, and to take a
fresh draught of the liquor which had brought him to that state.  Yet he
was a fine, good-looking fellow, and pleasant-mannered enough when sober
and not opposed.  I have known several such, who have for years deceived
their owners and others on shore, led by outward appearance, till some
fearful catastrophe has been the result of their pernicious habits.

Night came.  The ship continued her mad career through the darkness; the
wind howling and whistling, the loose ropes lashing furiously against
the masts, and the sea roaring around.  Below all was confusion.
Numerous articles had broken adrift and were rolling about, the
passengers crouched huddled together in the cabin endeavouring to avoid
them.  Mothers pressed their children to their bosoms; the men were
asking each other what was next to happen.  The answer came with fearful
import.  "Breakers ahead!  Breakers ahead!"  There was a tremendous
crash, every timber in the ship shook.  She was on the rocks.

James Braithwaite, the Supercargo--by W.H.G.  Kingston



CHAPTER EIGHT.

A COMPLETE WRECK.

"Cut away the masts--the shrouds first!  Be smart, my men!" cried a
voice.

"Who dares give that order?" shrieked out the captain; "she'll be over
this in no time."

"I dare obey it!" exclaimed one of the seamen.  "Come, lads, it's the
best chance of saving our lives."

The men listened to the advice of their messmate, and, knowing where to
find the axes, quickly severed the shrouds of the mizen-mast, and some
attacked it, while others went to the mainmast, in spite of the mad
cries of the captain to "hold fast."  Their object was thus to force the
ship over the reef--if it was a reef we were on--head first, or closer
to the shore if we were on an island.  The seas came thundering against
our sides, often dashing over the decks, so that with difficulty any of
us could save ourselves from being carried away by them.  Several poor
people were thus swept away soon after the ship struck, and their
despairing shrieks rang in our ears as they were borne away or hurled on
the rocks amid the foaming breakers.  We could see nothing beyond the
ship except the troubled waters.  Our chief hope rested on her not being
wedged in the rocks.  Now she lifted and drove on her bottom, grinding
over the coral; now down she came again, and rocked to and fro in the
surges.  Directly the after masts were cleared away, her head paid off,
and we drove on stern first.  It was pitiable to hear the cries which
rose from the terrorstricken passengers, but as we could as yet give
them no comfort, I refrained from going below.  William and Trundle,
O'Carroll and I, stood together holding on to the stump of the mainmast;
the Frenchman and his son had gone below at the commencement of the
gale.  I hoped that they were still there.  The ship continued
alternately grinding and bumping along, but still evidently progressing
over the reef.  She must have been new and well built, or she would have
gone to pieces with the treatment she was receiving.  Our anxiety was
thus prolonged, for it was impossible to say, supposing the ship should
drive over the reef, whether we should find land, and if not whether she
would float.  It seemed as if each blow she received must be knocking a
hole through her planks.  Oh! how we longed for daylight, at all events
to see and face the dangers which beset us!  In the dark we could do
nothing but hold on for our lives and pray to be preserved from
destruction.

At length the ship was lifted by a huge wave.  On she drove.  It seemed
that the next time she came down on the hard rocks it must be to her
destruction.  On, on she went; the waters roared and hissed around her.
Instead of the expected catastrophe, suddenly she appeared to be
floating with comparative calmness; she had been forced over the reef,
but the furious wind was still driving her before it.

"We should anchor this instant!" said O'Carroll; but neither the master
nor his mates were on deck to give the necessary orders.  "Stand by to
anchor!" cried O'Carroll.

The two midshipmen, with Kelson and several of the crew, hurried to
carry out the order.  Some delay occurred in consequence of the
darkness.  At length the anchor was let go, but as the ship's stern
swung round it struck heavily on a rock.  Again cries of terror came up
from the passengers in the cabins; I therefore, as I could be of no use
on deck, went below in the hopes of tranquillising their minds.  They
clung round me as I appeared, entreating to be told the truth.  I
assured them that there was no immediate danger, and that, though the
ship had again struck on the rocks, there was so much less sea inside
the reef than what she had already gone through, I hoped she might
continue to hold together.  In all probability we were not far off land.
Some, on hearing this, especially those who had been most overcome with
terror, expressed their joy in all sorts of extravagant ways, and seemed
to consider that there was no longer any danger to be apprehended;
others, again, would scarcely credit what I told them, and inquired what
the captain thought on the subject.

"The captain!  What does he know about anything?" exclaimed a young man,
who appeared to be superior in education to most of the passengers.  "If
the ship is lost, and our lives sacrificed, on him will rest the blame.
Look there!"

He threw open the door of the captain's cabin, where he and the first
mate sat, both far too tipsy to move, yet still trying to pour spirits
down their throats.

"What's that you say?" growled out the captain, with an indistinct
utterance; "I'll have no mutiny aboard this ship."

He endeavoured to rise, but fell forward across the table, upsetting the
bottle and tumblers.  The mate was too far gone even to attempt to rise.
He gazed at us with an idiotic glance for a minute or two, then his
head dropped down on the little table at which he was sitting.  It must
be understood that all this time the ship was far from quiet; she was
still grinding and striking heavily against the rocks, though the sea
had not sufficient force to lift her over them.  I hurried again on
deck; my fear was that the ship would fill with water and drop off the
rocks and sink.  After hunting about we found the carpenter, and with
his help sounded the well; already there were six feet of water in the
hold.  After waiting a short time we found that the water was
increasing, the pumps must be set to work.  Some of the crew said it was
of no use, and refused; others came to our summons; and to help us we
called up all the men passengers, while we set the example by labouring
as hard as we could.  Thus the night passed.  It was indeed better for
everybody that we had something to do.  Dawn came at last.  We eagerly
looked out for the prospect which daylight was to reveal, whether we
were to find ourselves amidst reefs just rising from the water, or near
a mere sandbank, or on an inhabited shore.  At first we could only see,
as before, the white foam dancing up, then dark rocks and yellow sand,
and beyond it brown hills and a few trees.  As the light still further
increased we discovered that the country was in a state of nature; in
vain we looked for traces of inhabitants.

The passengers, hearing that we were close to land, came crowding on
deck, all eager to get on shore.  It was, however, no easy matter to do
so.  The sea came rushing round the ship, between which and the dry
rocks the distance was considerable, so that anybody attempting to swim
to them would have been swept away.  One small boat alone remained, the
rest had been knocked to pieces.  In this only two rowers could sit, and
a couple of passengers at the most.  As far, however, as we could see on
either side the surf broke too furiously to allow her to land, so that
she could, we feared, be of no use.

At length my brother cried out, "We'll go in her; there is one place
just inside the ship where we can jump on shore with a line.  If we can
do that we'll carry a hawser to the rocks, and all the people may land."

The two mids and Kelson agreed to go in the boat, towing a light line.
We watched them anxiously.  The water tossed and foamed around them, and
they had hard work to contend with the reflux of the sea.  Earnestly I
prayed that they might be protected and succeed, both for their sakes
and ours.  A shout of joy and thankfulness burst from the lookers-on as
Kelson leaped on the rock, followed by the two midshipmen, who instantly
hauled the boat up out of harm's way.  A hawser had been prepared, which
they at once hauled on shore and secured.  A cradle was next fitted to
it by the seamen, under O'Carroll's directions.  It was a question who
was to go forth to prove it.  At that moment Jacotot made his appearance
on deck.  He was told that he must go on shore.  He was secured
forthwith to the cradle.  In vain he struggled and protested: he was
quickly drawn across.  His son and Jack followed.  Two men then went to
assist in hauling the passengers across.  They were placed, one after
the other, in the cradle and landed in safety.  I was thankful when they
were all on shore.  There they stood, grouped together, gazing
helplessly at the ship, not knowing what to do.  There was no one to
guide them.  Those wretches, the master and his mate, still remained
utterly helpless in the cabin.  Half the crew of the ship had been lost,
and the young mate, who might have exercised some authority.  From what
I saw of the remainder of the crew I was afraid that they were mostly a
very bad set.  I dreaded their breaking into the spirit-room--which
seamen often do under such circumstances.  To prevent this it was
necessary to keep them amply employed; we urged them, therefore, to land
all the provisions that could be got out of the hold.

To expedite this proceeding we got another hawser carried on shore.  Our
lives might depend on the amount of provisions we could save.  All day
we worked on, till towards evening the water had risen so much in the
hold that nothing more could be got out.  The heat was intense, but so
important was the work that we scarcely stopped even to take food.  No
one had thought all this time of the captain and mate, the real cause of
their misfortunes.  Suddenly I recollected that they had been left in a
side-cabin asleep.  I hurried down.  I was but just in time; the water
was up to their heads, and in another minute would have washed over
their faces and drowned them as they lay sleeping off their debauch.  I
shouted out their names, and called them to come on deck.  They started
up, their countenances exhibiting their horror and alarm, as they
believed that the ship was sinking beneath them.  Out into the water
they tumbled.  The mate slipped, and caught hold of the captain to save
himself.  Over they went, struggling together.  I fancy that they
thought themselves overboard; right under the water they dragged each
other, once more to get their heads out, spluttering and shouting, and
swearing most fearfully.  At last, fearing that they might after all be
drowned, I seized the mate, who was the smaller man of the two, and
dragged him on deck, calling out to O'Carroll to assist in getting up
the captain.  He came to my assistance, and we hauled both the men on
deck.  Their sea bath and the struggle had brought them to their senses;
but when, after staring around for some time, they saw that the ship was
a hopeless wreck, cast away on an apparently barren island, they very
nearly lost them again.  To find fault with them at such a moment would
have been folly.  "Come, I advise you to go on shore, for very likely
the ship will go to pieces during the night, if the wind rise again," I
said quietly.  They were far from disposed to thank me for my advice,
though, after looking about for a few minutes, they took it, and were
hauled on shore.  After collecting everything of value to be found in
the cabin, compass, charts, and some nautical books, I followed.
O'Carroll was the last man to leave the ship.  William and his messmate
had been very active on shore, and got a tent rigged for the poor women
and children, and some food cooked for them by Jacotot.

No sooner was a fire lighted than the Frenchman was himself again,
hurrying about in search of the utensils necessary for his calling.  He
had cooked a capital supper for them, and he now offered to cook one for
us.  On collecting all the sails we had landed, we were able to form a
shelter for ourselves, as well as for the seamen; and at length, weary
with our exertions, we lay down to rest.  The captain and mate were very
silent, and I hoped ashamed of themselves.  During the night there was a
good deal of wind and sea.  I was thankful that we were on shore, and
when I looked out I almost expected to find that the ship had gone to
pieces.  There, however, she was, still holding fast together.  Seeing
this, the captain declared that he would get her off, and that if trees
could be found in the island suitable for new spars, he could proceed on
his voyage.

"If he knew of the bumping she got he wouldn't say so," observed
O'Carroll.  "That ship will never float again, and, strong as she is,
another gale such as we had last night will break her to pieces."

As there was nothing more to be done, we started to explore the island.
It seemed to be the chief of a group of rocky islets, being about six
miles long and half as broad.  Though we made diligent search as we
walked on, we could find no water.  A few small casks of the precious
liquid had been landed, but sufficient only for another day or two.

"And what shall we do when that is gone?" asked William.  It was a
serious question.

"We must trust in God, for vain is the help of man in such a case," I
answered; "at all events, we must use what we have got with the greatest
economy."

On returning to the camp and reporting our want of success in finding
water, what was our dismay to find that every drop in the casks had been
consumed!  All the poor people could say was that they were so thirsty,
and the children were so constantly crying out for water, that they
could not help giving it to them.  We were ourselves already suffering
greatly from thirst after our ramble, yet not a drop of water did we
obtain.  Our lips were parched, our tongues dry: without water we could
not eat, we loathed food, supperless we lay down to sleep.  All night
long I was dreaming of sparkling fountains and running brooks.  As soon
as it was daylight we again set out with a spade and pickaxe, prepared,
if we could find no running stream, to dig wherever verdure showed that
moisture was at hand.  We walked on and on, searching in every direction
round the shore, but no sign of a stream emptying itself into the sea
could we discover, and when we dug we soon met the hard rock.  Faint and
weary we turned to the camp.  We found a fire blazing, and Jacotot with
several men standing round it: two were working a rough pair of bellows,
others hammers and tongs.  All were employed under his directions, while
he was engaged in riveting a pipe into a large copper vessel.

"Why you trouble to look for water?" he asked.  "There is salt water,
there is wood to make fire, then we have plenty of fresh water.  We make
steam, steam come out and leave the salt in de kettle, and then find a
cold piece of iron and drop, drop, down into this tub all fresh and good
for drink."  He told us that he had seen a French doctor obtain fresh
water from salt in that manner.

"Most men have their merits, if we could but discover them and put them
in their right places," I thought to myself.  "We were inclined to laugh
at Jacotot, but if he can produce fresh water out of salt, he may be the
means of saving all our lives."

We watched him anxiously, all eager to help him, but he would not be
hurried.  At length the machine was finished, and we hastened to fill it
with salt water.  It was placed on the fire, and slowly the drops of
fresh water were distilled from it.  How eagerly were they sought for by
the poor creatures who stood round with lack-lustre eyes and parched
lips.  Jacotot insisted that the youngest should be served first.  I
think he was influenced by the wish to get his boy Auguste an early
draught.  That was but natural.  Some of the crew grumbled, and so did
the captain and mate, who were, in consequence of their late debauch,
suffering fearfully from thirst; but O'Carroll, William, Trundle,
Kelson, and two or three of the passengers formed a body-guard round the
Frenchman, to enable him to do as he thought right.  Only half a little
liqueur glass of the precious fluid was served out to each person.  It
was pleasant to see the eyes of the poor children brighten as the pure
water touched their lips.  The younger ones, however, directly their
allowance was gone, cried out for more.  Several times we had to stop
till more water was distilled.

While we were thus engaged, the wind had again got up, and the sea,
dashing over the reef, began to burst with violence against the shore.
The effect produced on the wreck was soon apparent.  The remaining upper
works began to give way.  As the sea rolled in with increasing violence,
plank after plank was torn off, then larger portions were wrenched from
the hull, the deck burst up, and was soon dashed into pieces against the
rocks.  As soon as we had swallowed enough water somewhat to slake our
burning thirst, we hastened to the beach to save what we could from the
wreck.  We hauled on shore all the planks and timber we could get hold
of, with the vague idea that we might be able to build a raft of some
sort, in which to make our escape.  At all events the wood would be
useful to construct huts for the women, or to burn.  As darkness set in,
a large portion of the wreck had disappeared, and even the captain was
convinced that her keel would never leave its present position, except
to be cast up in fragments on the rocks.  He and the mate had been very
quiet and low-spirited.  They were craving for their accustomed
stimulants, and several times I heard them grumbling at us for not
having landed any liquor for them.  Neither they nor the larger portion
of their crew had exerted themselves in the slightest degree to assist
us in our labours.  Most of them sauntered along the beach with their
hands in their pockets, or sat coolly watching us.  Fatigued with our
exertions, we at last returned to the camp, where Jacotot was able to
give us a glass of water, and we then, thankful even for that small
supply, lay down to rest.

It was not till late that any of us awoke; we then found that the
captain and mate, and several of their men, had withdrawn themselves to
a distance from the camp.  We were glad to be rid of their company,
though why they had gone away so suddenly we could not tell.  We could
not help suspecting, however, that they had done so with the intention
of hatching mischief.  When I speak of _we_, I mean our party from the
_Dore_, for we of necessity kept very much together.  I have not
particularly described the emigrants, for there was nothing very
remarkable about them.  Two or three were intelligent, enterprising men,
who had made themselves acquainted with the character of the country to
which they were going, and had tolerably definite plans for the
employment of their capitals.  The rest had mostly failed in England,
and were rather driven by want into exile than attracted by the
advantages the new colony had to offer.  They were all married men with
families, and this made them associate with each other for mutual
assistance.  The steerage passengers were generally small tradesmen, and
had emigrated for much the same reason as the others.  Three gentlemen
of the first-class, who were bachelors, had begged leave to join our
mess.  One of them had already been in New South Wales, and was able to
give us much interesting information about it.  So much taken was I,
indeed, with what I heard, that I resolved, should I be unable to find
the _Barbara_, to visit the colony before returning home.  We thus, as I
have explained, formed three chief messes.  We were not as yet either
very badly off.  We had saved provisions from the wreck sufficient, with
economy, to last us a couple of months or more; and now that we could
obtain fresh water, though but in small quantities, we were not afraid
of dying of thirst.  We were in hopes, too, of finding turtles and
turtles' eggs, and perhaps wild fowl, and we might also catch fish to
add to our stock of provisions.  Could we only find water, and some sort
of vegetables, we might be able, we thought, to support existence for
any length of time; and as far, indeed, as we could judge we might not
have an opportunity of escaping from the island for months, or it might
be for years.  This was not, however, a subject pleasant to contemplate.
I thought of my merchandise, William of his promotion, and of the
opportunities he might lose of distinguishing himself, while Jacotot,
though not idle, was unable to make money where he was.  Toby Trundle,
however, took things very easily.  He laughed and joked as much as ever,
and declared that he never was more jolly in his life.  He used to say
the same thing in the midshipmen's berth; he had said it on board the
boat, and I believe he would have said it under nearly any circumstances
in which he could have been placed.  The poor emigrants, on the
contrary, were very far from content.  Most of them had lost all they
possessed in the world, and knew that, should they even ultimately
arrive at their destination, they must land as beggars, dependent on the
bounty of others.  They were therefore naturally very loud in their
complaints of the captain and his mate, while they were continually
bewailing their own hard lot.  Those persons had, as I observed, removed
themselves to a distance from the rest of our shipwrecked band.

We had retired to tents for the night, and had lain down to sleep, when
after some time I was awoke by sounds of shouting and laughter, followed
by shrieks and cries, which seemed to come up from the beach where the
captain and his associates had taken up their quarters.  The noises
increased, and O'Carroll awoke.  He got up, and we went together to the
entrance of our tent.  The night was very calm.  The stars shone forth
from the dark sky with a brilliancy I have never seen surpassed; even
the restless sea was quiet, and met the shore with an almost noiseless
kiss; all nature seemed tranquil and at rest.  A shot was heard, and
then another, and another, followed by shouts and execrations.  "There
will be bloodshed among those madmen," exclaimed O'Carroll.  "They have
got hold of some liquor unknown to us, and are fighting with each other:
we must try and separate them."  Calling my brother and the rest of the
party to come to our assistance, we hurried off in the direction whence
the sounds proceeded.



CHAPTER NINE.

LIFE ON THE ISLAND.

When we got sufficiently near the beach to distinguish objects, we saw
the captain standing with a pistol in his hand, which was pointed at the
mate, who held a long knife in his hand, with which he was about, it
seemed, to make a rush at his opponent, while three or four men had
arranged themselves on either side, and were nourishing various weapons.
The shots we heard told us that they had already fired at each other
several times, but were too tipsy to take a steady aim.  One man,
however, lay wounded on the ground, and from the gestures of the mate,
he would in another instant plunge his knife in the bosom of the
captain, unless stopped by the latter's bullet.

"You knock up the skipper's arm, while I seize the other fellow,"
exclaimed O'Carroll to me, springing forward.

I did as he bid me; he ran a great risk of being shot.  The mate turned
on O'Carroll with an oath, and the captain snapped his pistol at me, but
fortunately he had already discharged it, and in another instant I
brought him, as he attempted to grapple with me, to the ground.
O'Carroll had mastered the mate, and the other men stood staring at us,
but offering no opposition.  "Is this the way for men to behave who have
just been saved from death, to make yourselves worse than the brute
beasts?  This--this is the cause of it!" exclaimed O'Carroll, kicking a
cask from which a stream of spirit was even then running out.  "It would
have been no loss to us if you had killed each other, but we could not
see our fellow-creatures perish without trying to save them."

The bold and determined tone in which O'Carroll spoke, aided by the
arrival of the rest of our friends, had such an effect on the seamen,
that those who were still able to move slunk away to a distance, while
the captain and his mate, when we let them go, sat down helplessly on
the sand, forgetting entirely their quarrel and its cause.  There they
sat, laughing stupidly at each other, as if the affair had been a good
joke.  While O'Carroll was emptying the rum cask, which it appeared had
been washed on shore and secreted by the captain, his men went to the
wounded man.  He did not speak: he seemed scarcely to breathe.  I took
his hand: it was already cold.  All this time he had been bleeding to
death: an artery had been shot through.  We did our best in the dark to
bind up the wound and stop the bleeding; the spirit which might have
kept his heart beating till nature, in her laboratory, had formed more
blood, was gone; indeed, probably in his then condition it would not
have had its due effect.  The wretched man's breath came fainter and
fainter.  There was no restorative that we could think of to be
procured.  We lifted him up to carry him to the camp, but before we had
gone many paces, we found that we were bearing a corpse.

"That man has been murdered," exclaimed O'Carroll, turning to the
captain.  "By whose hand the shot was fired which killed him I know not,
but I do know that his blood is on the head of the man who ought to have
set a good example to his inferiors, and prevented them from broaching
the cask they had found."

Whether this address had any good effect we could not tell, but hoping
that the men would remain quiet and sleep off the effect of their
debauch, we returned to our tent, leaving the body on the ground.  The
next morning we returned to the beach.  The captain and his drunken
companions still lay on the sand asleep.  They were out of the reach of
the sea, but the hot rays of the rapidly rising sun, which were striking
down on their unprotected heads, would, I saw, soon give them brain
fever or kill them outright, if they were to be left long exposed to
their influence.  I therefore proposed that we should rouse them up, and
advise them to go and lie down in the shade of some shrubs and rocks at
a little distance.

"Before we do so, we'll take away their weapons, and at all events make
it more difficult for them to do mischief to us or to themselves," said
O'Carroll.  Some of the men grumbled on being disturbed, as we turned
them round to take away their knives.  We left the unloaded pistols,
which, as they had no powder, could do little harm.  Having taken their
arms to our tents, we returned and awoke them, not without difficulty,
by shaking them and shouting in their ears.  One after the other they
got up, lazily rubbing their eyes and stretching themselves, and staring
stupidly about them.  The captain was one of the last to come to his
senses.  He started when he saw the dead body of his companion.

"Who killed that man?" he exclaimed, in an anxious tone.

"You did, most probably," answered O'Carroll.  "We heard shots fired and
found the man dead."

The captain felt in his pocket, and drew out a pistol with the hammer
down: it had been discharged.  "Then I am a murderer!" he exclaimed, in
a tone of horror, his countenance expressing his feelings.  "It wanted
but that to make up the measure of my crimes."

"It is but too true, I fear," said O'Carroll.

"Yes, too true, too true!" cried the captain, rushing off towards the
sea, into which he would have thrown himself, had not O'Carroll,
William, and I held him back.  It was some time before we could calm him
sufficiently to leave him alone.  He then went and sat down in the shade
at a little distance from his companions, who looked on at him with dull
apathy, while he gave way to the feelings which the prickings of his
awakened conscience had produced.  How he and the mate had got possessed
of the pistols we could not guess, till we found the chest of one of the
emigrants, a young man, broken open, and from this they had helped
themselves.  One of them soon after came for a spade which had been
landed, and we saw them hurriedly bury the corpse, as if eager to get
the silent witness of their crime out of sight.  For the remainder of
the day they were perfectly quiet, the mate coming humbly when the
provisions were served out to ask for their share; still we could not
trust them, as we knew that if they could get at more liquor, they would
very quickly again be drunk.  In the evening, indeed, they were seen
walking along the beach, evidently watching for the chance of another
cask being washed on shore.  They did not find one, however, and the
next morning were excessively sulky, keeping together and evidently
plotting mischief.  They, with the rest of us, were aroused, however,
soon after breakfast by the appearance of a sail in the offing.  The
more sanguine at once declared that she was standing towards us, and
that our fears regarding a prolonged stay on the island were groundless;
others thought that she would pass by and leave us to our fate.  Every
spyglass was in requisition, and numerous were the surmises as to the
character and nationality of the stranger.

"What if she is an enemy?" observed William.

"She will not find much plunder, at all events," answered Trundle.
"There is nothing like being at the bottom of the hill, so that you
cannot be kicked lower."

"Even an enemy would respect our condition," remarked O'Carroll; "we
have nothing to fear from one, I should hope."

"No, but an enemy would leave us where we are: a friend would carry us
away, or send us assistance," said I.  It was dinner-time, and Jacotot
had prepared our messes with his usual skill; but so eager were the
people watching the approaching stranger, that the food was scarcely
touched, except by the children, who of course little knew how much
depended on her character.  At length there was no doubt that she was
standing for the island, and the exhibitions of joy and satisfaction
became general among the unfortunate emigrants.  They would now be able
to leave the island and reach their land of promise; every countenance
beamed brightly except O'Carroll's.  After some time I saw his fall.  It
gained a more and more anxious look.  He scarcely withdrew the glass
from his eye.

"What do you make her out to be, O'Carroll?"  I asked.

"Braithwaite, as I am a living man, she's the _Mignonne_," he answered,
in a hoarse voice, his countenance still further showing the agitation
of his mind: "if that villain La Roche gets hold of me again, he'll not
let me escape with my life.  And these poor emigrants to have his
lawless crew come among them,--it will be terrible; better rather that
they had all gone to the bottom in their ill-fated ship with their
drunken captain."

Notwithstanding O'Carroll's opinion, I doubted whether the stranger was
the _Mignonne_, for she was still too far off, I thought, for him to be
certain on the subject.  I therefore tried to tranquillise his mind,
wondering that a man so brave, and cool, and collected, as he generally
was, should have such a dread of the French captain.

"I tell you yonder vessel is the _Mignonne_, and if you had been treated
as I was, and had witnessed the scenes I saw enacted on board, you would
not have a less horror of La Roche and his scoundrel crew than I have.
My reason does not help me; I cannot think of that man without
trembling."

I understood him, for I have myself been affected in the same way with
regard to one or two people who have done me some injury, or would, I
have had reason to believe, do me one should they have the opportunity.

"The only way to escape the pirates is to remain concealed while they
are passing," he observed.  "As there is no harbour here, and there are
no signs of them having been here, they will, in all probability, go to
the other side of the island, and we may escape them."

As I still further examined the stranger I began to fear that O'Carroll
was right in his conjectures, and I therefore agreed to assist him in
trying to persuade the rest of the people to hide themselves till the
privateer was out of sight.  The emigrants, frightened out of their wits
by the account O'Carroll gave of the privateer's men, were ready enough
to do as he advised, and began running here and there, not knowing where
to hide themselves.  We advised them simply to pull down the tent, to
put out the fire, and to sit quiet among the rocks and shrubs till the
ship had passed.

We then went on to see the captain and his men.  As we got in sight of
where they were, we saw that they had already got up a spar, which had
been washed on shore, and were in the act of hoisting a man's shirt to
the top of it in order to attract the attention of the stranger.  On
this O'Carroll shouted out to them in no very gentle tones, "Fools!
idiots! what are you about? would you bring an enemy on shore to murder
us?"  I then told them the character of the vessel in sight.  "What's
that to us?" answered one of the men.  "All masters are much the same to
us; they'll use us while they want us, and cast us adrift when they've
done with us.  Whether French or Spaniards, they'll not harm us.
They'll have liquor aboard, and that is what we shan't have as long as
we remain here."

It was useless attempting to argue with such men.  I turned to the
captain.  He had lost all authority over his people, who treated him as
an equal, or rather as an inferior.  He shrugged his shoulders and
walked away without speaking.  I saw that it was time, therefore, to
interfere, and William and I, rushing forward, hauled down the signal,
which one of the men was on the point of hoisting.  "If you are willing
to become slaves, we are not!"  I exclaimed, in a determined tone,
seizing the halliards and hauling down the signal.  The men threatened,
but as they had no arms, and we were firm, they did not attempt to
prevent us from carrying off the spar.

The ship approached, and as she passed along the coast so that we had a
broadside view of her, I had no longer any doubt that she was the
_Mignonne_.  I observed that even the seamen, notwithstanding their
bravado, kept so far among the rocks, that unless the privateer's men
had been especially examining the shore there was not much probability
of our being discovered.  We watched the vessel from the highest point
of ground we could reach, and we conjectured that she must have touched
at the other side of the island, concealed by an intervening ridge of
elevated land.  "If we are careful we shall escape all molestation from
the privateer's men," I remarked, addressing the emigrants.  "They are
not likely to come to our part of the island."

It was curious to observe the change which had come over O'Carroll.  He
was no longer the bold and sagacious seaman, but an anxious, nervous,
timid man.  At night I frequently heard him crying out in his sleep,
thinking that the dreaded La Roche was on him, and was about to carry
him on board the privateer.  As we could not do without a fire to obtain
fresh water, we were compelled to light one, though we thus ran the
risk, should any of the privateer's men wander into the country, of
being discovered.  Still that was a risk which must be run.  It was
curious, also, to observe the humble way in which, after a few hours,
the seamen came to beg for a draught of the pure liquid.  I was very
glad of this, as I saw that it would enable us to exert an influence
over them and to keep them in order.  The wretched captain held out for
some time, but at last came, with parched lips and bloodshot eyes,
entreating even for a few drops of the precious fluid to cool the tip of
his tongue.  It raised our pity to see how the wretched man suffered,
physically and mentally, and all the time without hope.  In vain I urged
him to seek for mercy as a penitent.  "Impossible! impossible!" he
exclaimed, with a wild laugh.  "You do not know what I have done, what I
am doomed to do."  And tearing himself away from me, he rushed off, and
was hid from sight among the rocks and bushes.  Day after day passed by,
and we kept anxiously hoping that the privateer would take her
departure.  It was suggested that if she came to the island to refit,
the Frenchman might possibly have a storehouse, with boats, perhaps, or
means of building one, and that we might thus be assisted to make our
escape.  At last, so long a time had elapsed since her arrival, that we
began to fancy that she had gone out of harbour during a moonlight
night, and reached the offing without our perceiving her.  To settle the
point, William and Trundle volunteered to reconnoitre, and I, afraid
that they might venture too far, resolved to go with them.  We fixed on
that very afternoon to start, our intention being to get as close to the
harbour as we could before dark, and then to rest till the moon rose and
afforded us light.

"I hope that you'll have success, but it is a dangerous work you are
going on, young gentlemen," observed one of the emigrants, a Mr Peter
Lacy, or Lazy, as he was generally called, for it was most difficult to
arouse him to any exertion.

"Never fear, Mr Lazy, danger is a sweet nut we midshipmen are fond of
cracking to get at the kernel--honour.  We shall be back all safe before
morning, and able to give a satisfactory report."

In good spirits we set off, for a considerable part of the distance
keeping along the shore, to avoid the tangled bush and rocks of the
interior.  As, however, we approached the harbour, or rather the place
where we supposed the harbour to be, we left the beach and kept a more
inland course, taking advantage of all the cover we could find to
conceal ourselves.  At last the sun went down and it quickly grew dark,
so we called a halt, and ate some of our provisions with a good
appetite.  We listened attentively, but could hear no sound, so we
agreed to push on directly the moon got up.  As we did not speak above a
whisper, a very soporiferous proceeding, I was not surprised that both
Toby and William fell asleep.  It was more necessary, therefore, that I
should keep my eyes and ears open.  At last I saw what looked like the
illuminated dome of some vast cathedral slowly emerge from the dark line
of the horizon; up it rose, till it assumed a globe-like form, and
appeared to decrease in size, while it cast a bright silvery light over
the hitherto obscured landscape.  I roused up the two midshipmen, who
were sleeping as soundly as if they had been in their hammocks.  We
worked our way onward among tangled underwood, not without sundry
scratches and inconvenient rents in our clothing, till we reached a
hill, up which we climbed.  From the top we looked down, as we had
expected to do, on the harbour.  Below us lay the _Mignonne_, or a ship
very like her; her sails were loose and bulging out with the land
breeze, while from the sounds which reached us it was evident that her
crew were heaving up the anchor preparatory to sailing; boats were
moving backwards and forwards over the surface of the calm water of the
harbour, on which the moon shone with a refulgence which enabled us to
see all that was taking place.  The anchor was shipped, the sails were
sheeted home, and the privateer slowly glided out of the harbour on her
errand of mischief; two, if not more, boats returned to the shore fully
manned.  Farther up the harbour lay three large hulks, with their lower
masts only standing; they were high out of the water, showing that they
had no cargoes in them.  There were also several smaller craft, but all
were dismantled, and looked as if they had been there for some time.
The French, then, had a settlement on the island.  The inhabitants were
sure to be armed, and probably were as numerous as our party.  If so, it
would be unwise to attempt gaining anything by force, though of course
we might surprise them.  We waited till the people in the boats had had
time to turn in and go to sleep, and then descended to reconnoitre the
place more nearly.  We crept cautiously on till we reached several
scattered cottages, or huts rather, built, without any regularity, as
the nature of the ground seemed most suitable.  There were also two or
three storehouses close to the water; indeed, we saw enough to show us
that there was a regular settlement made by the French for the purpose
of refitting their ships.  The barking of several poodles in the
cottages made us afraid of moving about much, lest their inmates should
look out and discover us.  We therefore retraced our steps to the hill.

"A magnificent idea," exclaimed Trundle, as soon as we called a halt.
"We'll surprise and capture the place and hold it for the King of
England.  You'll be made governor, Braithwaite, to a certainty."

"To be turned out by the first French privateer which enters the
harbour--to be thrown into prison and perhaps shot.  Thank you," said I,
"I would rather not."

"This establishment solves a mystery," observed William.  "We have often
been puzzled to know what has become of vessels which have disappeared,
and which, from the fineness of the weather, and for other reasons, we
did not suppose had been lost.  We should do good service if we could
get away without being discovered, and send some of our cruisers to
watch in the neighbourhood."

I agreed with William; at the same time the idea of capturing the place
was very attractive.  If we should make the attempt and succeed,
however, we should find liquor there, and the seamen would certainly get
drunk and mutinous.  No object would be gained, either, unless we could
immediately send a vessel to sea, to give notice at the Mauritius of our
success and obtain assistance.  Discussions on these points occupied us
till daylight, when we recommenced our journey to the tents.  The news
we brought was so far satisfactory to our companions, that we were not
likely to be starved to death, and as peace would come some day or
other, we might then hope to make our escape.  No one, however, seemed
at all desirous of attacking the French settlement; the risk was
considerable, the gain problematical.  It was finally agreed that we
should remain quiet where we were, and only in case of extremity make
ourselves known to our foreign neighbours.  The more energetic of the
party became, as may be supposed, very impatient of the inactive life we
were compelled to lead.  We could do little else than fish all day, and
make expeditions in search of water.  In this we were at last
successful; the spring was more than a mile away, and it became a
question whether we should move our camp there, the objection to our so
doing being that it was so much nearer the French settlement.  The next
morning, on going near the spot where the captain and his companions had
erected their tent, I saw no one moving.  I called to them.  There was
no reply.  I went to the tent.  It was empty!  It was supposed that they
had gone to the newly-discovered spring, but those who had gone to bring
water from it told us that they were not there.  While we were wondering
what had become of the men, as William happened to be sweeping the
horizon with his telescope, he cried out that he saw a sail in the
offing.  In a short time afterwards another was descried, her topsails
gradually rising out of the water.  She was pronounced to be larger than
the first which had appeared.

"It is that scoundrel La Roche again!" exclaimed O'Carroll, after eyeing
the nearest stranger for some time.  "I knew that it would not be long
before he would be back again, and there he comes with a big prize,
depend on it."

"But suppose, instead of the big ship being his prize, he has been
captured by one of our cruisers, and has been sent in first to show the
way?"  I suggested.

"No, no, the headmost craft is the _Mignonne_, and the big one is an
Indiaman, her prize, depend on that," said O'Carroll.

There seemed every probability that he was right, but this did not
increase our satisfaction.  The only thing that could be said was that
we should now have companions in our misfortune.  As may be supposed,
however, we watched the approach of the two ships with the greatest
interest, feeling assured that in some way or other they would have a
considerable influence on our fate.



CHAPTER TEN.

AN ANXIOUS TIME.

Our anxiety to ascertain the fate of those on board the ship which the
_Mignonne_ had brought in as a prize induced me, with my brother William
and Trundle, to make another expedition to the French settlement.  We
ventured much nearer during daylight than we had done the first time, as
we were certain that the people would be watching the arrival of the
privateer and her prize.  We were able, indeed, to reach a spot
overlooking the harbour, where, among some thick bushes, we concealed
ourselves before the ships came to an anchor.  William had brought his
telescope, and we could almost see the countenances of the people on the
decks of the ships.  The large one was, we saw at once, an Indiaman
outward bound.  We knew that by the number of young men and the young
ladies on board, and their clear ruddy complexions.  Had she been
homeward bound, there would be old yellow-faced generals and judges,
black nurses, sickly ladies, and little children.

We anxiously watched the proceedings of those on board.  The passengers
were walking up and down in a very disconsolate mood: the crew were
clustered forward.  By their looks and gestures as they cast their eyes
towards the privateer, we thought that even then they were about to
attack the Frenchman, and attempt to regain their liberty.

"I hope they will.  I should like to help them," exclaimed William and
Trundle, starting up simultaneously.

I drew them back.  "Nonsense! we could not help them, and they will not
make the attempt," I said.  "See, the Frenchmen are going on board
armed.  They know what they are about."

Two large boats with armed men were pulling from the privateer to the
Indiaman to strengthen her prize crew, while Captain La Roche was going
on board her in his gig.  He was soon up her side, and began bowing and
scraping away most politely to the passengers, especially to the ladies.
We could almost fancy that we heard him apologising to them for the
inconvenience and disappointment he was causing them, with a spice of
mockery in his tone, suggesting that it was the fortune of war, and that
another day their turn might come uppermost.  The crew of the Indiaman
were then sent down the side, and rowed off to one of the hulks, while
the passengers were conveyed to another.

"Then those hulks are prison ships after all," observed William, when
the operation was concluded.  "We may get on board them and let out the
prisoners some day."

In this I partly agreed with him, though I could not help seeing the
difficulties in the way.  Even this hope was likely to be frustrated,
for as we watched the Frenchmen who came on shore, we saw that they were
joined by several men whom we had little difficulty in recognising as
the crew of the wrecked ship, the very people who had lately deserted
us.  The mate was with them, but we did not see the captain.  Perhaps,
drunkard as he was, he was ashamed to go over to the enemy.  All the
party now entered a drinking-house together, being evidently on the most
friendly terms.

We had therefore no longer any doubt that our existence would be made
known to the privateer's men, and that the difficulty of surprising them
would consequently be much greater than we had calculated on.  We found
that it was time to retrace our steps, all we had gained from our
expedition being the knowledge that many of our countrymen and
countrywomen were in even a worse condition than we were.  Our report
when we got back to the tents put our companions very much out of
spirits.  What were we to do? was the question.  Some proposed that we
should go at once and deliver ourselves up to the French, petitioning
for their clemency.  O'Carroll strongly opposed this.

"We are at liberty now, boys: if we once get into the hands of these
French they will be our masters, and make us do what they like," he
observed; and his influence, supported as he was by us, carried the
point.

We wondered that Jacotot did not betake himself to his countrymen; but
he laughed and said that he was now an English subject, that he should
then be only one among many, that he was with us not only the principal
cook, but the only man worthy to be called a cook; indeed, that he was
perfectly content to continue to share our fortunes.

As several days passed and we received no visit from the Frenchmen, we
began to hope that the seamen had not betrayed us.  So far that was
satisfactory, but had they remained faithful, I think that there is
little doubt that we should have attempted the rescue of the prisoners.
At last once more we saw the _Mignonne_ put to sea; and immediately on
this, with O'Carroll and Sam Kelson in company, after watching for some
time without seeing anything of the English sailors, we therefore
conjectured that either they had quarrelled with the French and been put
in prison, or had gone on board the privateer--too probably the latter.
After a consultation, we agreed that we would, at all events, pay a
visit to the passengers of the Indiaman.  The French could scarcely
think it necessary to keep guards constantly watching them, and we might
therefore easily accomplish the undertaking.  We accordingly set off to
move round the harbour, intending to conceal ourselves in some spot near
the Indiaman, that we might watch our opportunity for getting on board.
We had gone on for some distance, and were approaching the spot,
concealing ourselves carefully as we advanced, when sounds of laughter
reached our ears--honest English laughter.  We stole on, very much
inclined to join in it, considering that we had not had a good laugh for
some time, when from some rocks up which we climbed we saw below us a
large party of ladies and gentlemen engaged in discussing a dinner in
picnic fashion on the grass.  They all seemed remarkably merry and
happy.  The younger gentlemen were running about helping the ladies, and
doing the polite in the most approved fashion.

Trundle smacked his lips so loudly at the sight that some of the party
turned a hasty glance in the direction where we lay hidden, supposing
probably that the noise was made by some bird in the foliage above their
heads.  In a short time one of the young gentlemen was called on for a
song.  He without hesitation complied.  I forget the strain.  It was a
right merry one.  Another followed him, and then another.

"I say, Braithwaite," whispered Toby Trundle, "just let me go down and
introduce myself, and then you know I can introduce you all, and I'm
sure that they will be glad to make your acquaintance."

I nodded to Toby, and in an instant he slid down the rock, and was in
the very midst of the party before any one observed where he had come
from.  Their looks of astonishment at finding an English midshipman
among them were amusing.

"Why, where have you dropped from, youngster?" exclaimed a civilian, a
judge returning from--what was more unusual in those days than at
present--a visit to England.  "The clouds?"

"Not exactly; 'tis but from up there, where I have a number of friends
who would be glad to make your acquaintance," answered Toby promptly.
"May I introduce them?"

"By all means--very happy to see them," answered the nabob, as all civil
servants of the Company were called in those days if they were well up
the tree, and had made money.  "Bring them down at once."

"I have not a gun, sir, or I might do it; but I'll hail them, which will
answer the purpose," answered Master Toby, with a twinkle in his eye.

We scarcely waited for his call, but tumbling down one after the other,
we stood before the assembled company, to whom Toby, looking as grave as
a judge, introduced us formally by name, finishing off with "Sam Kelson,
boatswain's mate of his Britannic Majesty's frigate _Phoebe_."

"The very ship we spoke the day before we were captured," observed our
friend the judge.  "She was on the look-out for Captain La Roche and his
merry men, and if she falls in with them, they will have a hard matter
to escape; but sit down, gentlemen, we are very glad to make your
acquaintance.  We are companions in misfortune, though in some respects
you have the advantage over us, by being at liberty."

We found that the passengers were allowed to live as before on board the
Indiaman, and were under no sort of restraint, they having given their
word not to attempt to escape from the island while the French had
possession of it.  We were treated in the most friendly manner by all
the party, Sam Kelson finding a companion in a corporal, the servant of
a military officer going out to rejoin his regiment Trundle soon let out
to our new friends the intention we had entertained of trying to release
them.  They thanked us, but said that the attempt would have been
useless, as the mouth of the harbour was strongly guarded.  There were a
good many other people on board the ships, while the officers and seamen
remained strictly guarded, and were not allowed to visit the shore,
except when the _Mignonne_ or some other privateer ship of war was in
the harbour.  Their only fear was that they might run short of
provisions before they were released, or that at all events they should
have to live on very coarse and scanty food.  They advised us to keep
out of the Frenchmen's sight, lest we should be pounced on and treated
as seamen and belligerents; this we very readily promised to do.
Altogether we had a very pleasant and merry meeting, and were sorry when
our friends told us that the hour for their return on board had arrived.
It was arranged that they should have another picnic party in the same
spot in three days, and they kindly invited us to join them.  On our way
back we had, as may be supposed, plenty of subjects for conversation.

"That Miss Mary Mason," said Toby, "is a sweetly pretty girl.  I would
go through fire and water to serve her."

"And Julia Arundel is one of the most lively, animated girls I have met
for a long time," remarked William, with a sigh.  I had observed
O'Carroll in conversation with a lady who seemed to be a former
acquaintance.  He told me that he had known her in her younger and
happier days, that she had married an officer in India, had come home
with three children, who had all died, and that she was now on her way
to rejoin her husband.

"Her case is a very hard one," he remarked.

"So I suspect we shall find are the cases of many," I answered.  "Sad
indeed are the effects of war!  The non-combatants suffer more even than
the combatants.  That is to say, a far greater number of people suffer
who have nothing to do with the fighting than those who actually carry
on the murderous work.  Oh, when will war cease throughout the world?"

"Not until the depraved heart of man is changed, and Satan himself is
chained, unable further to hurt the human race," answered O'Carroll.
"What has always struck me, besides the wickedness of war, is its utter
folly.  Who ever heard of a war in which both sides did not come off
losers?  The gain in a war can never make amends for the losses, the men
slain, the physical suffering, the grief: the victorious side feel that
only in a less degree than the losers."

I cordially agreed with him.  Yet how many hundreds were daily falling
at that time in warfare--how many thousands and tens of thousands were
yet to fall, to gratify the insane ambition of a single man, permitted
to be the fearful scourge that he was to the human race?  We said as
little about our expedition as we could, for the emigrants, as soon as
they heard of so many of their countrymen being in the neighbourhood,
were eager to set out to see them.  We, however, persuaded them to
remain where they were, for a visit of so large a party would not fail
to be discovered by the French, and greatly increase the annoyances of
our position.  We, however, paid our second visit to the passengers of
the Indiaman, and found them on shore at the place where we had first
met them.  Their spirits, however, had already begun to flag; their
guards had been less courteous than at first, sickness had attacked two
or three, gloomy apprehensions were troubling the minds of many.  Still
we had a pleasant dinner, and the song and the jest went round as
before.  The two midshipmen were the merriest of the party, and paid, as
may be supposed, the most devoted attention to the two young ladies whom
they thought fit to admire.  Their happiness was, however, disagreeably
interrupted by the appearance in our midst of half-a-dozen armed
Frenchmen.  They nodded familiarly at us.  "Bien, messieurs; you have
saved us the trouble of going to fetch you," said one of them, in a
sarcastic tone.  "You will not leave this, but as you are seamen, you
will accompany us to the prison ship."

We soon found that they had been made acquainted by the seamen of the
_Kangaroo_ of our being on the island, and had only waited for leisure
to go and bring us to the settlement.  Another party had already been
dispatched to bring in the emigrants, and from the rough unmannerly way
in which these treated our new friends, we could not but feel the
gravest apprehensions as to the indignities to which they might be
subjected.  Our own existence in the hands of lawless ruffians would be
very different from what it had hitherto been.  The appearance of these
unwelcome visitors completely broke up the picnic party, and while our
friends returned to their ship, we were marched off towards one of the
hulks.  We soon had evidence of the bad disposition of our captors
towards us, for Toby Trundle, who was very indignant at being thus
caught, beginning to saunter along as if he had no intention of hurrying
himself to please them, one of them threatened to give him a prog with
his bayonet.  As we were walking along as slowly as Trundle could
contrive to go, the sound of a shot reached our ears.  It came from the
sea.  Our guards started and talked rapidly to each other.  Several
other shots followed in succession, some close together.

"There are two at it, of that I am sure," exclaimed O'Carroll.

The Frenchmen continued their gesticulations with increased animation.
They were evidently eager to get to the mouth of the harbour, whence
they could look seaward.

"They think that there is something in the wind, depend on that,"
observed Trundle.

Presently the firing became more and more rapid, seeming to our ears to
come nearer and nearer.  The Frenchmen could no longer restrain their
eagerness to learn the cause of the firing, and totally disregarding,
probably indeed forgetting us, off they set running towards the shore as
fast as their legs could carry them.  We waited for a few minutes to let
them have a fair start, and then followed in their wake for some
distance, turning off, however, after a time, to the right, so that,
should they come back to look for us, we might not so easily be found.
We in a short time reached a high rocky mound, whence we got a view of
the sea spread out before us.  Within a mile and a half of the land were
two ships, both with topgallant sails set, standing in close-hauled
towards the harbour.  The wind was somewhat off the land, but yet, if it
continued steady, it was possible that they might fetch the
harbour-mouth.  Such, it appeared evident, was the object of the one,
while to prevent her so doing was the aim of the other, which was the
larger and nearer to us.  As soon as the two midshipmen set eyes on the
latter, they clapped their hands like children with delight, exclaiming
at the top of their voices, "The _Phoebe_! the _Phoebe_! hurrah!
hurrah!"  O'Carroll took a more steady glance at the other ship, and
then shouted, with no less delight, "And that's the _Mignonne_, and La
Roche's day has come at last."

"I should hope so, indeed," cried Trundle; "depend on it the _Phoebe_
won't have done with him till she has made him eat a big dish of humble
pie."

The frigate kept firing rapidly her foremost guns at the Frenchman, who
replied to them in a spirited manner with his aftermost ones, as they
could be brought to bear.  He was all the time luffing up, trying to eat
into the wind, as it were; but as that was scant, it gave the _Phoebe_,
which was well to windward, a great advantage, and she was now rapidly
coming up with him.  As she did so, she every now and then luffed up for
an instant, and let fly her whole broadside, doing considerable
execution.  We eagerly watched the effect of the shot.  The Frenchman's
sails were soon riddled, and several of his spars seemed to be wounded,
many of his ropes, too, hanging in festoons.  At last, directly after
another broadside, down came his spanker gaff, shot away in the jaws,
while the mizen topsail braces shared the same fate.  In vain the crew
ran aloft to repair the damage; the ship rapidly fell off, and all
prospect of her fetching up to the harbour was lost, unless by a miracle
the wind should suddenly shift round.  The instant the sail came down,
the midshipmen gave vent to their feelings of exultation in a loud "Hip,
hip, hurrah!" in which we could not help joining them, and the crew of
the _Phoebe_, whom we could fancy at the moment doing the same thing.

"Don't be too sure that the _Mignonne_ is taken, however," cried
O'Carroll.  "I never saw a faster craft, and see, she is keeping away,
and going to try what her heels can do for her, dead before the wind."

The _Mignonne_, however, could not keep away without being raked by the
_Phoebe_, whose shot, now delivered low, must have told with fearful
effect along her decks.  This done, the _Phoebe_ instantly bore up in
chase, and not having lost a spar, though her sails had several
shot-holes through them, rapidly gained on her.  The Frenchmen, to give
themselves every chance of escape, were now busily employed in getting
out studden-sail booms, in spite of the shot which went whizzing after
them.  In a marvellously short space of time a wide spread of canvas was
exhibited on either side, showing that, though many of her men had
fallen, she had a numerous and well-trained crew.

"They are smart fellows, indeed," I remarked.  "Many of them fight with
halters round their necks."

"That makes fellows smart in more senses than one," answered O'Carroll.

The _Phoebe_, of course, had to set her studden-sails, and away the two
ships glided before the freshening breeze.  We watched them with
breathless interest.  Their speed at first seemed so equal that the
chased had still, it seemed, a chance of escaping.

"Trust to our captain, he'll stick to her till he has made her strike,
or he will chase her round the world," said the two midshipmen, in the
same breath.

The _Mignonne_ was firing away all the time with her stern chasers,
while the frigate was replying from those at her bows.  They were both
firing at each other's spars, the one hoping, by crippling her opponent,
to escape, the other to prevent her doing so.  What had become of our
guards all this time we had not for a moment thought, while we hoped
that they had equally forgotten us.  The chase, indeed, probably
absorbed their attention as it did ours.  Few of us doubted that the
English frigate would ultimately capture the Frenchman; but should she
do so would she of necessity come back with her prize to our island, or
would she sail away, and, perhaps ignorant of our existence, leave us to
our fate?  One thing was evident, that we ought to guard ourselves
against the insolence of the French garrison.  The men were evidently
the scum of society, and should they find themselves without restraint,
it was impossible to say what atrocities they might not commit.  Anxious
as we were to know the result of the chase, we agreed at once to go back
to our friends to give them warning, and to consult with them what steps
to adopt.  Before leaving our look-out place we took one more anxious
glance at the two ships.  Both O'Carroll and the midshipmen declared
that the _Phoebe_ was positively overhauling the _Mignonne_, and that in
a short time we should see the latter haul down her flag.  I doubted it.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

ATTACKED BY THE FRENCH FLEET.

Our friends on board the Indiaman were thrown into high spirits on
hearing of the prospect of being released.  They advised us, however, to
get on shore again as fast as we could, and hide ourselves, lest the
soldiers, hoping to be ultimately successful, should ill-treat us for
having run away from them.  We told them that our intention had been to
release all the English prisoners, and to overpower the Frenchmen.

"Blood will be shed if you do, to no purpose," observed the judge;
"should the frigate be successful and come back here, as I have no doubt
she will, we shall be released; if the _Mignonne_ escapes and returns,
her crew would quickly again overpower us and obtain what they wish, a
good excuse for ill-treating us, of which they will not fail to avail
themselves."

The judge's opinion carried the day, and we hurried on shore, and
returned by a circuitous route to the spot whence we had witnessed the
engagement between the two vessels.  William eagerly swept the dark
well-defined line of the horizon with his telescope.

"Hurrah! there is one--yes, there are two sails!  Here, O'Carroll, see
what you can make out of them," he exclaimed, handing him the glass.

It was some time before O'Carroll would pronounce an opinion.  He then
declared positively that there were two ships, and that they were
approaching the land.  There was a strong breeze.  We sat down on the
ground, watching anxiously.  They came nearer and nearer.  We had no
longer any doubt that the _Phoebe_ had captured the privateer.  The
midshipmen declared positively that the largest was their ship.

"We ought to know her, though, to be sure, it is more of the inside than
the out we see of her," observed Toby.

All our doubts were set at rest at length, when the British ensign was
seen flying proudly over that of the French.

Three cheers burst almost involuntarily from our throats, which could
hardly have failed to have shown our whereabouts to the French soldiers;
but if they guessed the cause, they thought it prudent to take no notice
of our proceedings, but, as we supposed, hurried back to their abodes,
to conceal any property of value which they might possess.  William and
Trundle meantime were unable to resist the temptation of going on board
the Indiaman, to give our new friends the joyful news.  They said that
they should be back in plenty of time to see the ships enter the
harbour.  O'Carroll and I preferred waiting to watch proceedings.  At
length the frigate and privateer got close in with the land, when both
hove-to.  What was now to happen?  Boats were seen passing between the
two vessels, and then the _Mignonne's_ head came slowly round towards
the mouth of the harbour, and on she glided towards it.  The flags
remained as they were, and men, we saw, were stationed at the guns.
Some opposition was probably expected.  There was a fort at the entrance
of the harbour--not a very formidable-looking affair--with five ship's
guns mounted in it.  Round them we saw the greater part of the mongrel
garrison clustering as if they were going to show fight, but if so, they
thought better of it, for, after a short consultation, they sneaked
away, leaving the fort to take care of itself.  The _Mignonne_ came
gliding on, bearing evident traces in her masts and rigging of the
punishment she had received, and of the obstinacy--or what would have
been valour in a better cause--with which she had been defended.  We met
the midshipmen running down towards the landing-place, and jumping into
the first boat we could find, we got alongside her directly she dropped
anchor.

"Why, Braithwaite, Trundle! where have you come from?" exclaimed several
voices, as the midshipmen clambered up the side.

They soon gave an account of themselves, and I need scarcely say that we
were heartily welcomed by the officers of the _Phoebe_ in charge of the
prize, who were in high spirits at having captured a vessel which had
proved one of the greatest pests to British commerce in the Eastern
seas.  The Frenchmen had not yielded till more than a third of their
number lay dead or desperately wounded on her decks.  Among them were
several of the seamen of the unfortunate _Kangaroo_, including her
wretched captain and mate.  The survivors of the Englishmen declared
that they had been forced on board and compelled to fight.  We declined
to express any opinion on the subject.  All we could say was that we had
missed them from the encampment, and had every reason to suppose that
they had fallen into the hands of the French.  They thus escaped
hanging, which I certainly believe they deserved.  The chief offenders
had already paid the penalty of their crimes.  I need scarcely describe
the delight of the passengers of the Indiaman on finding that they could
now proceed on their voyage, or of the prisoners who were released from
the different hulks.  They were the officers and seamen taken in
different prizes by the _Mignonne_.  The excuse the Frenchmen gave for
treating them thus barbarously was that the French taken by English
cruisers were shut up on board hulks in English harbours without good
food or any exercise.  They pretended not to understand that, in one
instance, the prisoners would inevitably have escaped had they been left
at liberty, while in the present they had had no opportunity of
escaping.  The mouth of the harbour having been surveyed, the frigate
came in the next day, that her crew might assist in repairing the
_Mignonne_ and getting the Indiaman and the other vessels ready for sea.
I was curious to ascertain what O'Carroll would say to finding La Roche
at length a prisoner.  I asked him if he would go on board the frigate
with me to see the French captain.

"I would not do so to triumph over a fallen foe, but perhaps if I was to
set eyes on him again for a few times I might get over the intense
dislike--even more, the dread, I feel for him," he answered.  "I have
reason to feel dislike.  He ruined my prospects, he killed my
companions, and he treated me with every indignity and cruelty he could
devise while I remained on board his ship.  He made me serve him as a
menial--wait behind his chair, clean his shoes, arrange his cabin, and
if I displeased him he ordered his men to flog me.  Ay!  I never told
you that before, I was ashamed to do so.  He well-nigh broke my spirit.
Had I remained much longer with him he would have done so, or I should
have gone mad and jumped overboard.  Still I will see him."

We went on board the frigate and enquired for the privateer captain.
Having already, it appeared, broken his parole in England when he had
once before been taken, Captain Young had refused to receive it, and he
was therefore confined below in a cabin, with a sentry placed over him.
It was naturally supposed that he would otherwise take some opportunity
of getting on shore, and, knowing the locality, might remain concealed
till he could escape from the island altogether.  Accompanied by the
master-at-arms, we entered the cabin.  La Roche was seated in an
easy-chair reading a book when the door opened.  He did not rise, but,
looking up, nodded to O'Carroll, whom he seemed instantly to recognise.

"Ah, mon ami! it's the fortune of war, you see.  Once I had you in my
power, now your countrymen have me," he said, in a cool, unconcerned
manner.  "It is pleasant, is it not?--pleasanter for you than for me.
However, my turn may come next, and then--"

"I hope not.  I hope while I live that I may never again be in your
hands!" exclaimed O'Carroll, interrupting him.  "You remember how you
treated me?"

"Oh, well! and it is in your power to inform the captain of this
frigate, and probably he will treat me in the same way."

"No, indeed!  Englishmen never treat their prisoners as you treated me,"
answered O'Carroll; "Monsieur knows that well enough.  I did not come
here to insult you; I did not come to triumph over you.  You had
inspired me with a horror I could not get over.  I came here to be
cured.  I am so, thoroughly.  You have done much injury to the commerce
of my country, and the only ill I wish you is that you may be kept a
close prisoner till the termination of the war, and never again be able
to do an injury to Englishmen."

La Roche shrugged his shoulders at this address, and smiled.  "Well, you
Irishmen are indeed curious.  I should have thought that you would have
liked to see me hung up to the yard-arm," he observed, in the same cool
tone as before.  "However, your moderate wishes may be gratified, or I
may make my escape; and if I do, and ever capture you again, I promise
you that I will remember your moderation, and treat you to the best of
everything I have on board."

We soon after this brought our interview with the famous privateer
captain to an end, and O'Carroll assured me that all his unpleasant
monomaniacal feelings with regard to him had been, as he hoped,
completely dissipated.  As we were about to leave the ship Captain Young
politely invited us to remain and dine with him.  He showed much
interest in O'Carroll's account of his misfortunes, and finally arranged
that he should take the command of one of the vessels in the harbour to
convey the emigrants to New South Wales.  I, of course, received no
direct communication from Captain Hassall, but from the information
Captain Young gave me I had great hopes that the _Barbara_, instead of
sailing immediately for the east, had gone to the coast of Madagascar,
in which direction the _Phoebe_ herself was bound.  Captain Young
offered me a passage should I wish to rejoin my ship.  The Indiaman
being refitted for sea by the united exertions of all the crews, we all
sailed out of the harbour in succession, the _Phoebe_ leading.  The
_Mignonne_, with her prize crew and some of the prisoners on board, was
bound for the Mauritius, to give information of the capture of the
island; the emigrant ship was bound for New South Wales, the Indiaman
for Calcutta, we for Madagascar.  I went on board the _Argo_, the ship
commanded by O'Carroll.  I found him well satisfied with his change of
circumstances.  There was only one thing about which he was concerned.
La Roche, though still a captive, was alive, and might soon regain his
liberty.

"If he does I'm sure that he will cause me trouble again," he observed.
"I don't know what causes it, but I even now cannot think of the
venomous little man without a feeling of dread--a creeping sensation,
Braithwaite.  Do you know what it is?"

"Not exactly," said I.  "But the remedy I suggest is not to think of
him.  Whenever his image appears banish him with a kick.  Or, let me be
serious, O'Carroll.  Is it not our own fault if we go on living in fear
of death all our life long!  Put your trust in God, and fear not what
man can do to you."

"You are right! you are right!" exclaimed O'Carroll, warmly; "it is just
the want of doing that has made me--no coward, as you know--constantly
tremble at unseen dangers.  Henceforward I will try to follow your
advice."

"Do," said I; "and depend on it your dread of the little Frenchman will
completely and for ever vanish."

I parted from O'Carroll--as honest a man as ever broke a biscuit--with
the sincere hope that we should meet again.  The crews of our respective
ships gave three hearty cheers as we separated on our respective
courses.  We accompanied the _Mignonne_ for some distance towards the
Mauritius, when several sails were reported in sight from the mast-head.

"I hope that they are enemies!"  I heard Trundle thoughtlessly exclaim.
"Glorious fun to have a fight.  We, too, should soon give a good account
of them."

Both ships were speedily got ready for action, for in those days it was
difficult to sail far without meeting an enemy.  It might be one to be
captured--snapped up in an instant; it might be one of equal or not of
vastly superior size, to be fought bravely, and taken in the end; or,
mayhap, one so much larger that it would be necessary to make all sail
and run away, a proceeding not very often practised in those days by
British naval commanders.  It was rather doubtful, however, from the
number and size of the ships in sight, whether we should not find it
necessary to have recourse to the last expedient.  We continued,
however, steering as before, and rapidly nearing the strangers, when, to
the relief of the less pugnaciously disposed, first one and then the
others made their number, and we discovered, as we got sufficiently near
to exchange telegraph signals, that they were three frigates--the
_Galatea, Racehorse_, and _Astrea_--on their way to the coast of
Madagascar to look after a French squadron, which, having been driven
away from the Mauritius, had gone in that direction.  We should now be a
fair match for the Frenchmen whenever we should meet them.  Having put
most of our prisoners well guarded on board the _Mignonne_, we parted
from her, she to continue her passage to the Mauritius, we to accompany
our consorts in search of the enemy.

A bright look-out was now kept for the enemy, and from sunrise to its
setting the mastheads were adorned with eager watchers, each wishing to
be the first one to espy the Frenchmen.  However, the lofty mountain
ridges of Madagascar hove in sight before any of them were seen.  I had
become very anxious about the fate of the _Barbara_.  Had she prosecuted
her voyage to this coast, and fallen in with the enemy?  If so, she must
have been captured, and too probably sent away to one of the
settlements.  In spite of my advice to O'Carroll, this idea took
complete possession of my mind, and I felt convinced that the voyage
from which so much had been expected would come to nought.

Night closed in on us, and the usual answer was given to the watch below
by those who had come off deck, "Not a sign of a sail in sight."  The
next morning the sun arose out of his ocean bed brighter even than is
his wont in that bright clime, first lighting up the topmost heights of
the mountains with a roseate tinge, while a purple hue still lay spread
over the calm ocean.  As usual, officers and men were going aloft, with
telescopes over their shoulders, to take a look round for the enemy,
when, as the sun rose higher, a shout of satisfaction burst from many a
throat, for there lay, well in with the land, their white canvas shining
brightly in his beams, the French frigates of which we were in search.
The wind came off the land, and we were far to leeward.  They thus had
greatly the advantage of us.  We did our utmost, however, to beat up to
them.  Every sail that could draw was set, and we continued to tack and
tack hour after hour, hoping to reach them, and that some fortunate
shift of wind would give us the weather gauge and enable us to choose
our own time for action.  As I went along the decks I was struck by the
bold and determined appearance of the men as they stood at their
quarters, stripped to the waist, and mostly with handkerchiefs of many
colours tied round their heads.  The costume was appropriate, for the
heat was excessive, besides which, sailors know well that the suffering
is much less, should they be wounded, if no pieces of cloth are carried
into the body with the shot.  They were chatting and laughing, and many
of them were cutting all sorts of jokes.  I had volunteered to serve as
the captain's aide-de-camp, to carry messages for him to any part of the
ship, or to assist the surgeons in the cockpit.

"You would do good service on deck, and I respect your feeling in
offering to be there," he answered; "but you are a non-combatant.  You
have nothing to gain by exposing your life.  You will therefore oblige
me by performing the far more painful task of assisting the surgeons."

I bowed with a feeling of disappointment at my heart, which I probably
exhibited.

He smiled and said, "It is possible, after all, that there may be very
little employment for your talents."

There was a shout on the upper deck, taken speedily up by the men on the
main deck.  The enemy were seen bearing down on us.  On they came,
nearer and nearer.  Where we lay it had fallen a perfect calm, and our
sails kept flapping against the masts.  Still the breeze favoured them.
I felt very queer, I confess.  I had no intention of going below till I
was wanted, and it did not occur to me that I might be turned into a
patient myself.  The delight of the sailors at seeing the French thus
boldly approaching was excessive, nor did they fail to praise them for
their courage.

"Bravo!  Johnny Crapaud.  That's more than I thought of you.  Come
along!  Don't leave us again.  We won't hurt ye more than we can help.
You are brave fellows, that you are; we always thought so.  Now you show
it.  Bear a hand, though."

I heard such and similar expressions from most of the men as I passed
along the decks.  Suddenly there was a gloom from one end of the ship to
the other.  The breeze which had been bringing the Frenchmen along
suddenly dropped.  It had served, them, however, well enough to bring
them pretty close up to us.

"Now," I thought to myself, "I shall see what a regular stand-up
sea-fight is like."

Still I could not help feeling all the time that my vocation was one of
peace, and that I had no business to be where I was.  That is not a
pleasant sensation.  The great thing for a man to feel in time of danger
is that he is at his post and doing his duty.  As I was in for it, I
determined to do my best to be of me, and to trust to the God of mercy
for protection.  The enemy soon showed us that they had no intention of
being idle.  A shot came whistling over our heads, and fell a
considerable distance on the other side of us.  This showed them that we
were within gunshot range of each other, and immediately they opened
fire in earnest.  Some of the shot flew over our heads, others on one
side or the other, but hitherto none had struck us.  I had a hope that,
after all, there would be no bloodshed.  We meantime had commenced
firing, but either the Frenchmen's powder was better or their guns
longer, for our shot mostly appeared to fall short, greatly to the
vexation of our crew.  The enemy also having had the last of the wind,
while we were becalmed, were able to take up a better position than we
had, and continued warmly engaging us, we often being scarcely able to
return a shot.

As I had nothing to do below, I remained on deck.  More than once,
however, I could not help ducking my head as a shot whistled above it.
Possibly it might have been too high to have struck me.  However, I soon
got accustomed to that, and as no one had as yet been hurt, I began to
fancy that after all a sea-fight was not so terrible an affair as I had
supposed, and that possibly we and the Frenchmen might part without
doing much harm to each other.  I had been standing near a fine young
fellow, Jem Martin by name, captain of a gun, who had for some time past
been cutting, with more than ordinary humour, numbers of jokes on the
enemy.  I was struck by his bold attitude and thoroughly sailor-like
look.  His bright blue eye beamed with life and animation.  I had turned
my head away from him when a shot whistled by, and I heard a piercing
shriek, such as a strong man utters but once, wrung from his bosom by
mortal agony.  I looked round, and on the deck lay the shattered body of
a human being.  There were a few spasmodic movements of the limbs, and
all that remained of Jem Martin was the mangled corpse at my feet.  I
shuddered, for I could not help feeling that such as he was I might now
have been.

The event seemed to affect his shipmates but little; another seaman took
his place, and the gun was loaded, run out, and fired.  The fact was
that they had no time just then for thought or the indulgence of
feeling.  The enemy's shot now came thicker and thicker; many went
through the sails, others wounded the masts and spars and cut away the
rigging, and several more of our men were hit.  As soon as they were
carried below, I followed, to assist the surgeon in attending to their
wounds.  I had long before this forgotten all about the danger to which
I was myself exposed, but I could not forget that I had a young brother
on board who might any moment be numbered among the killed or wounded.
It seemed to me, indeed, that we were getting so much the worst of it,
that I began to dread that the flag of England might have to strike to
that of France.  The idea was not a pleasant one; it was not, however,
shared in by others on board.

After we had received a pretty severe battering for the space of two
hours, the breeze got up, and the Frenchmen hauled off to repair
damages.  On seeing this the rage of our men became very great, and they
cried out to the officers that they might be allowed to go after them.
As the enemy were to windward this was not easily to be done, and we had
to wait patiently in the hope that the enemy would choose to renew the
fight, while in the meantime our top-men were knotting and splicing
rigging, and the carpenter's crew were strengthening the wounded yards
and stopping shot-holes.  At length the breeze reached us, and as it
filled our sails the crew cheered in anticipation of being able soon to
get to closer quarters with the enemy.  After making numerous tacks, two
of our squadron got up to two of the French ships, which seemed in no
way disposed to refuse battle.  While our gallant commodore closed with
the _Renomme_ we engaged the _Clorinde_.  The fight soon gave work for
our surgeons, and I went below, as I had undertaken to do, to help them.
As I left the deck I cast a glance at my young brother, who had charge
of a division of the guns, and was standing on the deck cheering on the
men, full of life and animation.  The shots were thickly flying about
his head; any moment one might lay him low.  I could but offer up a
prayer for his safety.

The surgeon and his mates were already at work.  I hung up my coat and
tucked up my sleeves, prepared to assist them.  I will not describe the
scene of suffering I witnessed.  Most of the poor fellows bore their
agony with wonderful fortitude.  Two officers had been brought below
wounded.  I kept looking up anxiously every time I saw the feet of men
descending the ladder, dreading that they might be bringing down my
young brother.  Still I kept praying for his safety while I followed the
surgeons' directions.  A young seaman had been brought down fearfully
wounded.  I had remarked him on several occasions among the most active
and zealous of the crew.  The surgeon examined him.  He did not groan--
indeed, he did not appear to suffer much pain.

The surgeon shook his head.  "I can do nothing for him," he whispered to
me.  "You may be able, perhaps, to speak a word of comfort, and there is
nothing just now for you to do."

I was rather surprised at the surgeon saying even thus much.  Perhaps
the light of the lantern, which at that moment fell on my countenance,
revealed my thoughts, for he added, "I was asked to look after the lad,
whose mother is a widow, and, God help me!  I have done little for him,
and now it is too late."

The young seaman was placed on a hammock opened out on the deck of the
cockpit.  I knelt down by his side, and, after repeating such passages
out of the Word of life as occurred to me, I engaged in prayer.  He
followed me in a low voice.  Suddenly he was silent.  I looked toward
him; the immortal spirit had taken its flight from his frail body.
Still the battle raged; more of our poor fellows were brought down, and
I once more was called on to assist the surgeons in their painful task.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

A GLORIOUS VICTORY.

I began seriously to fear that we were getting the worst of it.  Shot
after shot came crashing on board, and several more men were brought
down.  I expressed my fears aloud to the surgeon.  A poor fellow already
on the table about to undergo amputation overheard me.  "Don't think of
that, sir," he exclaimed; "they are tough ones, those mounseers, but
we'll go down with our colours flying sooner than strike them."

At that instant our ears were saluted by loud cheers, which burst from
the crew on deck.  Still the firing was kept up, and it was evident that
our ship continued in action.  At last, another wounded man being
brought down, we heard that the _Renomme_, the French commodore's
frigate, had struck.

In a few minutes another cheer was heard, the firing ceased, and we had
the satisfaction of finding that the _Clorinde_ had also struck her
colours to us.  My heart felt intense relief when I found that the
action was over, and that my young brother had escaped without a wound.
Then I recollected that those who had been killed had not been brought
below.  I wondered that he had not come below to relieve my anxiety.
Those of whom I inquired could not tell me what officers had been
killed.  The instant, therefore, I could leave the poor suffering
fellows I had undertaken to assist, I hurried on deck.  When I went
below the frigate had presented a trim and orderly appearance.  Now her
sails were torn and full of shot-holes, her running rigging hung in
loose festoons, with blocks swaying here and there, her bulwarks were
shattered, her lately clean deck ploughed up with round shot covered
with blood and gore, and blackened by powder.  The thickening shades of
evening threw a peculiar gloom over the whole scene.  I looked anxiously
round for William.  I could not see him.  My heart sank within me.
Could he be among the slain?  A midshipman hurried past me.

"Where is Braithwaite, my brother?"  I asked, in a trembling voice.

"There; don't you see him on the forecastle?"

I looked in the direction to which he pointed.  My heart bounded up
again as I saw him directing the men engaged in bending a fresh
foresail, which had before concealed him from my sight.  My voice
trembled with emotion as I ran forward, and, shaking him by the hand,
congratulated him on our victory and his safety.  He seemed scarcely to
understand my agitation.

"Yes, I am thankful to say we have thrashed the enemy, and I wish there
were a few more to treat in the same way.  There is one fellow making
off, and I am afraid the _Astrea_ will not be able to work up to bring
her to action."

I looked out as he spoke.  One of our frigates, to which he pointed, was
a long way to leeward, while a French frigate was standing under all
sail to the north-west.  Our two antagonists appeared fearfully
shattered, both the French commodore's ship and the _Clorinde_, which
was even in a worse condition than we were.  All our boats had been so
injured by shot that we were unable to send one to take possession of
our prize, and as the night was now rapidly coming on, we could not hope
to do much to repair damages till the morning.  As long, however, as the
men could work, the carpenter's crew continued putting the ship to
rights.  The rest of the already overworked crew were then piped below,
that they might be able to renew their labours on the morrow.  I had
plenty to do in assisting the surgeons in attending on the wounded, till
at last, well wearied out, I turned into my hammock, thankful that my
dear brother and I had escaped the perils of the fight, and sincerely
hoping that, as it was my first battle, so it might be the last in which
I should be engaged.  Before going below I took a look towards our
prize, whose light I saw burning brightly at no great distance from us.
I had now time to think of my own affairs, and of course was not a
little anxious about the fate of the _Barbara_, for it was too probable
that she had fallen into the hands of the Frenchmen.  If so, they would
probably have sent her to France, as she was well provisioned for a long
voyage, or to one of their settlements, where she could be disposed of
to advantage.  My sleep was sadly disturbed with these thoughts and with
the scenes of pain and suffering I had witnessed.  I awoke soon after it
was light, and dressing quickly went on deck.  It was to find everybody
there in a state of no small anger and vexation.

"She is off, gone clean out of sight," I heard people saying.

I inquired what was the matter.

"Why, it is enough to vex a man, Mr Braithwaite," observed the first
lieutenant.  "As we could not send on board last night to take
possession of our prize, she has managed to slip away during the
darkness.  She left a light burning astern on a cask to deceive us.  If
we ever come up with her we'll make her pay dearly.  The other fellow,
too, has got clear away; however, we will find him out, wherever he has
hid himself."

Soon after this the commodore signalled to us to send our boats to
assist in removing the prisoners from the _Renomme_.  Thanks to the
exertions of the carpenter and his crew, three were already made capable
of floating.  I asked to take an oar, as I wished to go on board the
prize.  No sooner did I step on board than I regretted having come.
Terrible was the scene of slaughter I witnessed.  The frigate had been
crowded with troops, nearly one-half of whom had been cut down by the
_Galatea's_ shot, which she had poured into the Frenchman's hull.  The
crew were only now beginning to throw the dead bodies of their shipmates
overboard.  The French commodore, a gallant officer, and many others,
were killed.  But the wounded nearly doubled the killed, and they
chiefly excited our sympathy.  Their own surgeons were already almost
worn out with attending to them, and of course we could not spare any of
ours to render them assistance.  The more of the effects of war I saw,
even on this small scale, the more I longed for the time when wars are
to cease and nations to live at peace with each other.  It was not,
however, the fashion to speak on that subject in those days, nor do the
nations of the world, alas! appear more inclined now than then to bring
about that happy state of things!

When taking some of the prisoners on board the _Galatea_, I found she
had also suffered severely, though not at all in proportion to the
_Renomme_.  Captain Schomberg ordered us, as soon as our damages were
repaired, to make sail for the port of Tamatave, on the east coast of
Madagascar, where he suspected the other French frigate had taken
refuge, her captain supposing probably that we should return at once
with our prizes to the Mauritius.  The _Astrea_ coming up, her crew went
on board the _Renomme_, to put her to rights, and this being done, all
four frigates made sail together for Tamatave.  It is merely a
reef-formed harbour, and by no means a secure or good one.  The English
had sent a force of about fifty men there after the reduction of the
Mauritius, and they had, we understood, built a fort, or taken
possession of an old one.  It was a question whether they had been able
to hold it against the French, or had been compelled to surrender.  As
we approached the coast, all our glasses were in requisition, to
ascertain whether any ships were at anchor off the place.  There were
two, certainly, one larger than the other.  The wind was light, but we
at length got in close enough to see that the French flag flew at their
mastheads, as also over the fort, and that there were several smaller
vessels.  I thought that there would be more fighting, but instead of
proceeding to that extremity, the commodore sent in a boat with a flag
of truce, pointing out the overpowering force he had under him, and
demanding the instant surrender of the ships and fort.

We anxiously watched for the return of the boat, for if the demand were
not acceded to we should have, it was understood, to go in and cut out
the ships with our boats.  Many liked the thought of such an exploit, in
spite of its dangerous character.  It was very possible that the French
captain might hope, with the support of the fort, to be able to beat off
the boats, and to hold out until the squadron should be driven off by a
storm.  At last the boat was seen returning.  The frigate was the one
which had escaped from us.  Her captain wisely agreed to yield to the
fortune of war, and to give her up with all her prizes, and the fort
into the bargain.

"And what is the name of the other ship?"  I asked.

"The _Barbara_ merchantman," answered the lieutenant.  "She was on the
point of sailing with a French crew when we appeared, so that her owners
have had a narrow chance of losing their property."

This was, indeed, satisfactory news.  I was, of course, very eager to go
on board and hear from Captain Hassall what he intended doing.  The
account brought off as to the state of the English garrison was
melancholy.  The fort was built in an especially unhealthy spot, with
marshy undrained land close round it.  The consequence was, that of the
fifty men who had been sent there, when the French appeared not a dozen
were alive, and that sad remainder were scarcely able to lift their
muskets.  They had therefore at once yielded to the enemy.  Several
others had since died, but the sickly season being now over, it was
hoped that the remainder would live on till the next year, when in all
probability during the same season they would share the fate of their
comrades.  I got a passage in one of the next boats which pulled in.
Captain Hassall had been allowed by the French to return to his ship,
and he was taking a turn on deck when I went alongside.  He looked at me
curiously two or three times when I stepped on deck, and, raising his
hat, inquired what I wanted.  Suddenly he stopped when he got close up
to me, exclaiming, "What!  James Braithwaite, my dear boy, is it really
you?  I am delighted to see you, for to say the truth, I had given you
up as lost.  I never supposed that cockleshell of a boat in which you
left the ship would have survived the hurricane which came on directly
afterwards."

There was one question above all others I wished to ask him, "Have you
written home to tell my friends of my loss?"

"No," he answered; "I have so often found people turn up whom I thought
had been lost, that I am very unwilling to send home bad news till it is
absolutely necessary, and as I did not require your signature, I was
able to avoid mentioning that you were not on board."

This answer greatly relieved my mind, and I was in a short time able to
talk over our arrangements for the future.  The capture of the _Barbara_
would, of course, be a heavy expense to the owners; but if the voyage
should prove as successful as we still hoped it would, a handsome profit
might yet be realised.  To that object we had now to bend all our
energies.  We were therefore anxious as soon as we could to proceed on
our voyage.  I had heard from the captain of the _Phoebe_ that an
expedition was fitting out in India for the capture of Batavia, the
chief town in Java, of which the French now held possession; and we had
great hopes, if we could reach it soon after the English had gained the
place, which of course we expected they would do, that we should sell a
large portion of our cargo to great advantage.  Before sailing, however,
we determined to see what trade could be carried on with the natives.
Fortunately, the French had not touched our cargo for that purpose.
Though they had made frequent attempts to form settlements in
Madagascar, they had never succeeded in gaining the confidence and
goodwill of the natives.  Had the plans of the Count Benyowsky been
carried out when he offered his services to France, they might possibly
have obtained a powerful influence in the affairs of the country, if not
entire possession of it.  His plans were, however, completely defeated
by the governor of the Mauritius, who, looking on Madagascar as a
dependency of that island, was jealous of his--the Count's--proceedings,
and finally drove him to make common cause with the natives against the
French Government.  I heard some details of the life of that
extraordinary adventurer.  The Count Benyowsky was a Polish nobleman,
who for some political reason was banished by the Russian Government to
one of its settlements in the extreme eastern part of Siberia, whence it
seemed impossible for him ever to find his way back to Europe.  The
governor of the town in which the Count was compelled to reside had a
daughter, young and lovely, who had conceived a warm affection for him,
which appears to have been fully returned.  Through the means of this
young lady he was able to gain information as to everything which was
taking place.  He heard, among other things, that two large Russian
ships were expected at the neighbouring port.  He had long been looking
out for the means of making his escape from Siberia.

Here was an opportunity.  None but a man of great boldness and energy
would, however, have considered it one.  He was a prisoner in a
fortified town; it contained a considerable number of his countrymen,
but they were prisoners strictly watched.  Still he was determined to
make the attempt.  He set to work and gained over a hundred men to
assist in his dangerous undertaking.  By some means they were able to
provide themselves with arms.  The governor's fair daughter undertook to
obtain the keys of the fortress, provided her father's life was spared.
The adventurers found it impossible to make their escape without first
mastering the garrison.  The conspirators were mustered, and were ready
for the enterprise.  The young lady brought her lover the keys.  Her
last words were, "Do not injure my father."

"Of course not, if he makes no resistance," was the Count's answer.

The gates were opened; the conspirators rushed in.  The old governor
was, however, not a man to yield without a struggle.  Putting himself at
the head of some of his men, he endeavoured to keep back the assailants.
Again and again he charged them, calling on the troops to rally round
him.  It was evident to the Count and his companions that if he were
allowed to live their undertaking would fail.  He therefore, pressed on
by numbers, was killed, with all who stood by him.

The adventurers, now putting all who opposed them to the sword, became
complete masters of the place, and without difficulty obtained
possession also of the two ships which had just arrived.  A sufficient
number of officers and seamen were found to navigate the ships, and,
having provisioned them for a long voyage, the Count, taking the
daughter of the governor with him, went on board them, with a hundred
companions, and made sail to the southward.  The Count had taken
precautions against pursuit; indeed, there were probably no Russian
men-of-war in those waters at the time, and thus he made good his
escape.  He touched at a variety of places.  He reached Canton in
safety.  Here he wisely sold his ships, as, had he fallen in with any
Russian men-of-war, his destruction would have been certain.  At Canton
he and his companions embarked on board two French vessels, in which
they proceeded to the Isle of France.  Here he announced his intention
of forming a colony in Madagascar, or perhaps of conquering the country
for France.

His plans, as I have said, excited the jealousy of the governor of the
Mauritius, and of other people of authority in that island, who
determined to oppose him.  Notwithstanding, he proceeded to France,
where he so completely gained the good opinion of the French minister
that he was appointed to take command of an expedition to found the
proposed settlement, with the title of governor-general.  He had married
the daughter of the Russian governor, and she accompanied him in all his
travels, but what was her ultimate fate I do not remember having heard.
After returning to the Isle of France, where the governor still kept up
his hostility, and opposed him by every means in his power, he set sail
with about three hundred men for Madagascar.  He landed at Antongil Bay,
where he was well received by the chiefs, but he at first was subject to
a good deal of opposition from the natives generally.  He did his best
to conciliate them, but as he had often to employ force, and to keep up
a strict military rule at the same time, it must have been difficult to
persuade them that his intentions were pacific and philanthropic.  He
seems to have met with heroic courage all the innumerable difficulties
by which he was beset.  He lost many of his officers and men by
sickness, as the position where he attempted to found his first
settlement, from being surrounded by marshes, was very unhealthy.  Among
others, his only boy lost his life by fever.  He was left without the
necessary supplies he expected from the Isle of France, the governor
purposely neglecting to send them.  The natives also were incited by
emissaries of the governor to oppose him, while, of the officers sent to
him, some were incapable, and others came with the express purpose of
betraying him.  Notwithstanding all these difficulties, by the middle of
1775 the settlers had built a fort in a more healthy situation, which
was called Fort Louis, had constructed all the necessary buildings for
the town of Louisbourg, and had formed a road twenty-one miles in length
and twenty-four feet in breadth.  The Count had also done something
towards civilising the people, and among other important measures had
persuaded the women to give up their practice of infanticide, which had
been terribly prevalent.  They, however, refused to ratify the
engagement without the presence of the Count's wife, who was residing at
the Isle of France.  She was accordingly sent for, and on her arrival
the women of the different provinces, assembling before her, bound
themselves by an oath never to sacrifice any of their children.  They
agreed that any who should break this oath should be made slaves, while
they were to send all deformed children to an institution which had been
founded by the Count in the settlement for that purpose.

He had by this time formed alliances with many of the surrounding
chiefs, who ever afterwards remained faithful to him.  In other parts of
the island combinations were formed against him.  He accordingly
mustered his forces, and marching against his enemies, who had brought
forty thousand men into the field, put them to flight.  Those who fell
into his hands he treated with so much leniency and kindness that he
ultimately attached them to his cause.  A curious superstition of the
natives was the cause of his being at length raised to the dignity of
the principal chief of the island.  It appears that the hereditary
successor to the title was missing, when some of the natives took it
into their heads that the Count Benyowsky was the lost heir.  The idea
gained ground at the very time that the affairs of the Count were in a
very precarious condition.  His own health was failing, the more
faithful among his European officers were dead, his enemies in the
Mauritius had succeeded in prejudicing the minds of the members of the
French Government against him, and two, if not more, vessels bringing
out supplies had been lost.  Under these circumstances it is not
surprising that he should have accepted the proffered dignity, which
shortly led to his being recognised as the principal chief and supreme
ruler of the whole island.

Commissioners had been sent out from France to investigate the affairs
of the settlement.  While they were there he took the opportunity of
giving up the command of the settlement to another officer, and entirely
dissolved his connection with it and with France, though he at the same
time, with the other chiefs, expressed his desire to live on friendly
terms with the inhabitants, and to support the settlement to the best of
his ability.  He employed some time after this in consolidating his
power and in improving the condition of the people.  He also drew up a
constitution, which for those days was of the most liberal character.
Having done all he could to civilise the people, he resolved to go to
Europe to establish mercantile relations with different countries for
the improvement of the commerce of his adopted country.

In France, though he had some friends who welcomed him cordially, he was
coldly received by those in power, though his course was supported by
the celebrated Dr Franklin, who was at that time in Paris.  At length,
quitting the country, he went to England; but though he offered to place
the country under the protection of the English Government, no
encouragement was afforded him.  All his hopes in Europe having failed,
he set sail for the United States, in the vessel he chartered with a
cargo of goods suited to the markets of Madagascar.  After remaining for
some time in the United States and obtaining another ship and cargo, he
reached Antongil Bay in July 1785.  He was here cordially welcomed by
the chiefs, but instead of going into the interior and assuming the
reins of government, he remained on the coast for the purpose of
establishing trading-posts where his goods might be disposed of.  He had
captured one port from the French, and was engaged in repairing a fort
built by them, when a body of troops landing from a French frigate
attacked him.  He retired with some few Europeans and natives into the
fort, where he attempted to defend himself.  The French advanced, he was
shot through the body, and being ignominiously dragged out, directly
afterwards expired.  Poor Count Benyowsky!  I could not help feeling
sorrow when I heard of his sad fate.

The climate of the low lands near the seashore was, from what we heard,
_very_ unhealthy, but in the hill country of the interior it is as
healthy as any part of the world.  We heard a good deal of the English
and French pirates, who had formed, a century before, some flourishing
settlements on the northern coasts.  The name of a bay we visited
(Antongil) was derived from one of the most celebrated, Anthony Gill.
Several other places also obtained their names from members of the
fraternity of freebooters.  While the pirates continued their
depredations on the ocean, they in general behaved well to the natives,
but when being hotly pressed by the men-of-war of the people they had
been accustomed to rob, they entered upon the most nefarious of all
traffics, that of slaves, and to obtain them instigated the people of
one tribe to make war on those of another.  This traffic has ever since
been carried on, greatly contributing to retard the progress of
civilisation.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

ARRIVAL AT JAVA.

I was very sorry to have to part from my brother William, and not a
little so from that merriest of merry midshipmen, Toby Trundle.

"We shall meet again one of these days, Trundle," I said, as I warmly
shook hands with him.  "I hope it will be in smooth water, too; we have
had enough of the rough together."

I did my best to express to the captain and officers of the _Phoebe_ my
sense of the kindness with which they had treated me from the first
moment I had stepped on board their frigate to the last.  We all sailed
together, the men-of-war and their prize, to proceed to the Mauritius,
then to refit and get ready for the expedition to Java.  We also were
bound for Java, but intended first to visit Antongil Bay for the purpose
of trading with the natives.  I was pleased to find myself among my old
shipmates again.  They had had no sickness on board, and not a man had
been lost.  The officers were the same in character, while their
individual peculiarities seemed to stand out more prominently than
before.

We found the natives at Antongil Bay very honourable in their dealings.
Many of the chiefs spoke French perfectly well, and looked like
Frenchmen.  They were, we found, indeed, descendants of some of the
Count Benyowsky's followers, who had married native women.  The children
of such marriages were generally highly esteemed by the natives, who had
raised them to the rank of chiefs.  From what I saw of all classes of
the natives of Madagascar, but especially of the upper ranks, I should
say that they were capable of a high state of civilisation, and I see no
reason why they should not some day take their place among the civilised
nations of the east.  When that time will come it is impossible to say.
Neither adventurers, like the brave and talented Benyowsky, nor French
settlements, will bring it about.  One thing, indeed, only can produce
it--that is, the spread and the firm establishment of true Christianity
among the people.

Some days after our departure we had a distant view of the island of
Rodriguez.  In about a fortnight afterwards we were glad to put on warm
clothing instead of the light dress suitable to the tropics; yet we were
only in the same parallel of latitude as Madeira.  It showed us how much
keener is the air of the southern hemisphere than that of the northern.
We soon after fell in with the monsoon, or trade wind, which sent us
flying along at a good rate; till early in August, on a bright morning,
the look-out at the mast-head shouted at the top of his voice, "Land ho!
Land ahead!"  It was the north-west cape of New Holland, or Australia,
a region then, as even to the present day, almost a _terra incognita_ to
Europeans.  As we neared it, we curiously looked out with our glasses
for some signs of the habitations of men, but nothing could be seen to
lead us to suppose that human beings were to be found there.  The shore
was low, sandy, and desolate, without the least intermixture of trees or
verdure.  A chain of rocks, over which the sea broke furiously, lined
the coast.  We continued in sight of this most inhospitable-looking land
till the next morning.  I could not help thinking of the vast extent of
country which intervened between the shore at which we were gazing and
the British settlement at Port Jackson, of which we had lately heard
such flattering accounts.  Was it a region flowing with milk and honey?
one of lakes and streams, or of lofty mountains? did it contain one vast
inland sea, or was it a sandy desert of burning sands, impassable for
man?

This was a problem some of my emigrant friends had been discussing, and
which I longed to see solved.  After losing sight of the coast of New
Holland, we had to keep a bright look-out, as we were in the supposed
neighbourhood of certain islands which some navigators, it was reported,
had seen, but no land appeared.  One clear night we found ourselves
suddenly, it seemed, floating in an ocean of milk, or more properly,
perhaps, a thick solution of chalk in water.  The surface was quite
unruffled, nor was there the slightest mixture of that phosphoric
appearance often seen on a dark night when the sea is agitated.  The air
was still, though it was not quite a calm, and the sky was perfectly
clear.  It took us some hours to slip through it.  We drew up some in
buckets, and found it to contain a small, scarcely perceptible, portion
of a fine filamentous substance, quite transparent, such as I have
occasionally seen where seaweed is abundant.  Whether this was the cause
of the milky appearance of the sea or not we could not determine.  We
were now sailing almost due north, for the Straits of Bally, as the
passage is called between that small island and the east end of the
magnificent island of Java.  About the middle of August, early in the
morning, again land was seen from the mast-head, and in a few hours we
entered the Straits I have just mentioned.  We could see the shores on
both sides, that of Bally somewhat abrupt, while the Java shore,
agreeably diversified by clumps of cocoa-nut trees and hills clothed
with verdure, looked green and smiling, contrasting agreeably with that
of New Holland, which we had so lately left.  A large number of small
boats or canoes were moving about in all directions, those under sail
going at great speed.  They were painted white, had one sail, and were
fitted with outriggers.  We had to keep a bright look-out lest we should
run suddenly into the jaws of any French or Dutch man-of-war, which,
escaping from our cruisers, might be pleased to snap up a richly-laden
merchantman like the _Barbara_.  We could not tell at the time whether
the proposed expedition had arrived, or, if it had, whether it had been
successful.

As we were coasting along, a hill appeared in sight, early in the
morning, the summit thickly surrounded by clouds.  As this nightcap of
vapours cleared away, a remarkable cone was exposed to view, the base
covered with the richest vegetation.  Soon after this we got so
entangled among clusters of rocky islands and coral reefs that we were
very much afraid we should be unable to extricate ourselves, and that
our ship would get on shore.  Though there was not much risk of our
losing our lives, the dread of having our ship and cargo destroyed was
enough to make us anxious.  Fortunately the wind fell, and by keeping
look-outs at each fore-yard-arm and at the mast-head, we were able to
perceive the dangers with which we were surrounded before we ran on any
of them.  At length we got into seemingly more clear water, but there
being still several reefs and islands outside of us, Captain Hassall
thought it prudent to anchor for the night.  The shore off which we lay
was lined with cocoa-nut and other palm-trees, rivulets were seen
flowing down the sides of the hills, which were clothed with
spice-bearing and other shrubs, the whole landscape presenting a scene
of great tropical beauty.

"If I ever had to cast anchor anywhere on shore, that's the sort of
country I should choose, now," observed Benjie Stubbs, our second
officer, who had been examining the coast for some time through his
glass.

"I wouldn't change one half-acre of any part of our principality for a
thousand of its richest acres," said David Gwynne, our surgeon, to whom
he spoke.  "Poets talk of the spicy gales of these islands; in most
cases they come laden with miasma-bearing fevers and agues on their
wings; while it a fellow has to live on shore he gets roasted by day,
with a good chance of a sunstroke, and he is stewed at night, and bitten
by mosquitoes and other winged and crawling things, and wakes to find a
cobra de capella or green snake gliding over his face."

"Oh, a man would soon get accustomed to those trifling inconveniences,
as the natives must do; and money goes a long way in these regions for
all the necessaries of life," answered Stubbs.

I must confess that, lovely as I had heard are many parts of those
eastern isles, I was inclined to agree with the surgeon.

It was discovered this evening that in consequence of the heat, or from
careless coopering, our water-casks had let out their contents, and that
we had scarcely any fresh water in the ship.  At Batavia it was very
bad, and it might be some days before we should get there, or we could
not tell when, should the expedition not have succeeded.  It was
therefore necessary to get water without delay, and as a river was
marked on the chart near to where we lay, we agreed the next morning to
go up, and, should we see no fort, to run in and obtain water and any
fresh provisions we might require.  Accordingly we weighed by sunrise,
and, standing in, ran along the coast till we arrived off the mouth of
the river we hoped to find.  Some native houses were seen, but no
fortifications and no buildings of an European character.  We therefore
thought that we should be perfectly safe in going ashore.  On dropping
our anchor, several canoes came off laden with turtles, ducks, fowls,
cockatoos, monkeys, and other small animals and birds; besides sweet
potatoes, yams, and other vegetables, grown by the natives for the
supply of the ships passing along the coast.  They found plenty of
customers among our men, and the ship was soon turned into a perfect
menagerie.  We without difficulty made the people in the canoes
understand that we wanted to replenish our water-casks, and we
understood them to say that they would gladly help us.  Two boats were
therefore lowered and filled with casks; Stubbs took charge of one of
them, and I went in the other, accompanied by little Jack Nobs,
intending to exchange a few articles which I took with me suitable to
the taste of the natives for some of the productions of their country.
As we pulled up the river we saw the low shores on either side lined
with houses built on high piles, by which they were raised a
considerable distance above the ground, some, I should think, fully
twenty feet.  The only means of entering them was by a ladder, which we
found it was the custom of the inhabitants to lift up at night to
prevent the intrusion of strangers, but more especially, I should think,
of wild beasts.  The chief object, however, of their being built in this
way is to raise them above the miasma of the marshy ground, which often
rises only two or three feet.  They were all on one floor, but had
numerous partitions or rooms.  The roofs, which were covered with palm
leaves, projected some distance beyond the walls, so as to form a wide
balcony all round.  The ground beneath was also in many instances railed
in, and thus served for the habitation of ducks, poultry, and cattle.

At the landing-place some way up a number of natives were collected, who
received us in a very friendly way.  We saw no Dutchmen nor other
Europeans.  As we could not make ourselves understood by the natives, we
were unable to ascertain what had occurred at the other end of the
island.  The men in the canoes had for clothing only a cloth round their
waists, but the people who now received us were habited in a much more
complete fashion.  They wore the _sarong_, a piece of coloured cloth
about eight feet long and four wide, part of which was thrown over the
shoulder like a Highlander's plaid, the rest bound round the waist
serving as a kilt.  They all had on drawers secured by a sash, and
several wore a short frock coat with buttons in front, called a _baju_.
All had daggers, and several, who were evidently people of some
consequence, had two in copper or silver sheaths.  The latter had their
teeth blackened, which was evidently looked on as a mark of gentility.
They also wore turbans, while the lower orders only had little caps on
their heads.  The watering-place was some little way up the river, and
while the mates proceeded there with the boats, I landed at the village
or town.  I had not proceeded far when I was given to understand that a
chief or some person of consequence wished to see me, for the purpose, I
supposed, of trading.  His habitation was pointed out to me on the
summit of some high ground at a distance from the river.  It appeared to
be far larger than the houses of the village.  Without hesitation I set
off, followed by Jack, and accompanied by several of my first
acquaintance, towards it.  I now more than ever regretted having lost
O'Carroll, for understanding as he did the languages of the people of
the Archipelago, he would greatly have facilitated our proceedings.

The house or palace of the great man was surrounded, as are all the
island habitations of every degree which I saw in Java, with gardens.
We entered on the north side into a large square court, on either side
of which were rows of Indian fig-trees, with two large fig-trees nearly
in the centre.  Passing through this we found ourselves in a smaller
court, surrounded by pillars, and covered in by a light roof.  Here most
of my companions remained, but I was conducted up a flight of steps to a
handsome terrace in front of a building of considerable size, in the
centre of which was a spacious hall, the roof richly painted with red
and gold.  This hall of audience was on the top of the hill; steps from
it led down to other houses which composed the dwelling of the chief and
his family.

As I looked down from the terrace, I could see the tops of the houses of
the poorer class of people, which surrounded the palace of the chief.
They were all in the midst of gardens, and had walls round them.  I
found, indeed, that I was in the centre of a town, or large village,
though in coming along I had scarcely seen any habitations, so
completely shut in were they by trees and shrubs.  I had thus an example
of the fertility of Java, and of the industry of its inhabitants.  With
regard to the habitations of the barbarians whose lands I visited, I
must observe that, though there were exceptions to the rule, they were
generally far superior in respect to the wants of the occupants than are
the dwellings of a large number of the poorer classes in Scotland, and
especially in Ireland, and in some districts even in England.  They are
in good condition, clean, sufficiently furnished, and well ventilated.
Granted that the materials of which they are built are cheap, that from
the fertility of the land a man by labouring three days in the week can
supply all his wants for the remaining four, and has time to repair his
house and furniture, and that he has no rates and taxes to pay, still I
cannot help believing that there is something wrong somewhere, that God
never intended it to be so, and that it is a matter it behoves us to
look to more than we have done.  Though distance seemed to increase my
love for Old England, it did not blind me to her faults, and I often
blushed when I found myself among heathen savages, and saw the
superiority of some of their ways to ours.  These or similar thoughts
occupied me while I stood on the terrace gazing on the fine prospect
around, and waiting for the appearance of the chief.

After some time the chief appeared at the entrance of the hall of
audience, with a gay coloured umbrella borne over his head, a slave
carrying the indispensable betel-box by his side, a handsome turban on
his head, and his sash stuck full of jewel-hilted daggers with golden
scabbards, while all his attendants stood round with their bodies bent
forward and their eyes cast to the ground, as a sign of reverence.  I
thus knew that I was in the presence of a very important person.  I was
rather puzzled to discover who he took me for, that he treated me with
so much state.  How we were to understand each other, and I was to
ascertain the truth, I could not tell.  I think I mentioned that I
learned a little Dutch, which I had practised occasionally with Peter
Klopps, my old cousin's butler.

I tried the chief with some complimentary phrases in that language, but
he shook his head; I then tried him with French.  He shook his head
still more vehemently, and, from the signs he made, I thought that he
was annoyed that I had not brought an interpreter with me.  After a
time, however, finding that he could get nothing out of me, he said
something to one of his attendants, who, raising his hands with his
palms closed till his thumbs touched his nose in rather a curious
fashion, uttered a few words in reply, and then hurried off by the way I
had come.  I was after this conducted into the hall, where on a raised
platform the chief took his seat, making signs to me to sit near him,
his attendants having done the same.  Slaves then brought in some basins
of water, in one of which the chief washed his hands, I following his
example.  Trays were then brought in, with meat and rice and fish, and
certain vegetables cut up into small fragments.  There were no knives,
or forks, or spoons.  The chief set an example, which I was obliged to
follow, of dipping his fingers into the mess before him, and, as it
were, clawing up a mouthful and transferring it to his mouth.  Had his
hands not first been washed, I certainly should not have liked the
proceeding, but as I was by this time very hungry, and the dishes were
pleasant tasted and well cooked, I did ample justice to the repast.

The chief and his attendants having eaten as much as they well could, my
young attendant Jack, who sat somewhat behind me, having done the same,
water was again brought in, that everybody might wash their hands.

I heard Jack Nobs in a low tone give rough colloquial expressions of his
satisfaction.

"They don't seem much given to talking, though," he added to himself.
"I wonder whether it is that they think we don't understand their lingo,
or that they don't understand ours; I'll just try them, though."

Whereon in a half whisper he addressed the person sitting next to him,
who bowed and salaamed very politely in return, but made no reply.

"What I axes you, mounseer, is, whether you feels comfortable after your
dinner," continued Jack, in a loud whisper.  "And, I say, will you tell
us who the gentleman in the fine clothes is, for I can't make out nohow?
Does he know that my master here is a great merchant, and that if he
wishes to do a bit of trade, he is the man to do it with him?"

The same dumb show on the part of the Javanese went on as before.
Jack's attempt at opening up a conversation was put a stop to by the
return of the servant with dishes containing a variety of vegetables and
fruits, which were as welcome, probably, to him as to me.  One dish
contained a sweet potato cooked.  It must have weighed from twelve to
fifteen pounds.  I have heard of one weighing thirty pounds.  The
natives appeared very fond of it.  We had peas and artichokes and a dish
of sago, the mode of obtaining which I afterwards saw, and will describe
presently.  I heard Jack cry out when he saw one of the dishes of fruit.
It was, I found, the _durian_, a fruit of which the natives are very
fond, and which I got to like, though its peculiarly offensive odour at
first gave me a dislike to it.  It is nearly of the size of a man's
head, and is of a spherical form.  It consists of five cells, each
containing from one to four large seeds enveloped in a rich white pulp,
itself covered with a thin pellicle, which prevents the seed from
adhering to it.  This pulp is the edible portion of the fruit.  However,
a dish of _mangostine_ was more to my taste.  It is one of the most
exquisite of Indian fruits.  It is mildly acid, and has an extreme
delicacy of flavour without being luscious or cloying.  In external
appearance it resembles a ripe pomegranate, but is smaller and more
completely globular.  A rather tough rind, brown without, and of a deep
crimson within, encloses three or four black seeds surrounded by a soft,
semi-transparent, snow-white pulp, having occasionally a very slight
crimson plush.  The pulp is eaten.  We had also the well-known
Jack-fruit, a great favourite with the natives; and the _champadak_, a
much smaller fruit, of more slender form and more oblong shape.  It has
a slightly farinaceous consistency, and has a very delicate and sweet
flavour.  I remember several other fruits; indeed, the chief seemed
anxious to show to me, a stranger, the various productions of his
country.  There were mangoes, shaddocks, and pine-apples in profusion,
and several other small fruits, some too luscious for my palate, but
others having an agreeable sub-acid taste.

We sat and sat on, waiting for the return of the messenger.  I observed
that whereas a calabash of water stood near the guests, from which they
drank sparingly, a jug was placed close to the chief, and that as he
continued to sip from it his eyes began to roll and his head to turn
from side to side in a curious manner.  Suddenly, as if seized with a
generous impulse, or rather having overcome a selfish one, he passed the
jug with a sigh over to me, and made signs that if I was so inclined I
was to drink from it.  I did so without hesitation, but my breath was
almost taken away.  It was the strongest arrack.  I could not ascertain
how the chief, who was a Mohammedan, could allow himself to do what is
so contrary to the law of the prophet.  I observed that his attendants
looked away when he drank, as they did when I put the cup to my lips; so
I conclude that they knew well enough that it was not quite the right
thing to do.  All the inhabitants of Java are nominally Mohammedans,
but, in the interior especially, a number of gross and idolatrous
practices are mixed up with the performance of its ceremonies, while the
upper orders especially are very lax in their principles.  Most of them,
in spite of the law of their prophet prohibiting the use of wine and
spirits, drink them whenever they can be procured.  The rich have as
many wives as they can support, but the poor are obliged to content
themselves with one.  I should say that my host, when I returned him the
jar of arrack, deprived of very little of its contents, gave a grunt of
satisfaction, from which I inferred that his supply had run short, and
that he was thankful that I had not taken more.  I kept anxiously
waiting all the time for the arrival of an interpreter, for whom I was
convinced the chief had sent.  After we lost Captain O'Carroll we
returned to our original intention of procuring one at Batavia.  This
must account for my being at present without one.  I had come on shore
in the hope that I might make myself sufficiently understood to carry on
a trade by means of signs, as I knew was often done.  As, however, my
new friends would not make the attempt to talk by signs or in any other
way, I had to wait patiently till somebody should arrive to help us out
of our dilemma.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

A PRISONER OF WAR.

I at length lost all patience at the non-arrival of the expected
interpreter, and, rising, made a profound salaam to the chief, which
was, I saw, accurately imitated by Jack, who was at my side with a
comical expression of countenance not indicative of much respect for the
great man.  The chief said something which I understood to mean that he
hoped I would remain longer, but as I really was anxious to return on
board, I only bowed again lower than before, and pointed towards the
harbour, continuing to move in the direction of the entrance.  He did
not attempt to stop me, and the people who had come with me were, I saw,
prepared to accompany me back.

I had just reached the outside, when I saw approaching an individual
dressed in the native shirt and _sarong_, or kilt, whom I naturally took
to be a Javanese.

He stopped and looked at me attentively, saying in Dutch, "I was sent
for by the chief to come and interpret for a French gentleman who has
arrived here on some diplomatic business of importance.  I shall be
happy to do my best, but you are aware that some of the troops of your
countrymen will be here soon, and that then there will be no lack of
people better able to interpret for you than I am.  You of course know
that the English attempted to make a landing, but have been defeated,
and it is thought probable that they will make another attempt in this
direction."  He appeared to say this in a very significant manner.  The
information he gave might or might not be correct, but there was a
friendliness in his look and tone which led me to suppose that he knew I
was English, and that he wished to warn me of my danger.  I was doubtful
what to say in return, but quickly resolved to hurry down to the
watering party to advise them to return on board and to warn Captain
Hassall, that he might be ready immediately to get under way.  I turned
to the seeming native, whom I now discovered to be a Dutchman, and
thanked him for what he had told me, remarking that our business was of
no consequence, and that as it was possible the wind might change, I
proposed returning on board at once.  He smiled, and said he thought it
was the best thing I could do.  This convinced me of his good feeling,
and that he knew I was English.  Just at that moment a guard of soldiers
emerged from the palace, and their officer, addressing the Dutchman,
made signs to me that I was forthwith to return.

"I am sorry," observed the Dutchman to me in English; "we must attend
the summons, but your boy need not, and you may send him to let your
companions know."

I took the advice and ordered Jack to find his way down to the boats,
and to tell the mates to hurry on board with or without water, and to
advise Captain Hassall to get under way immediately.  I added, "Tell him
to stand off and on for a couple of hours.  If I am at liberty I will
put off in a native boat, but if I am detained, tell him to save the
ship and cargo, and that I hope before long to make my escape."

Jack fully understood my message, but I must say, to his credit, that he
seemed very unwilling to leave me to my fate.

"I am in no danger," I remarked; "I may possibly be detained a few days,
but I am not likely to suffer any other inconvenience.  Now, quick, my
lad, or the ship and all hands may be caught in a trap."

Jack gave me a nod, and was off like a shot.  I scarcely expected,
however, that he would be allowed to go free; but no one, I suppose, had
received orders to stop him, and so he pursued his way unmolested.  The
officers of the guard had, in the meantime, been speaking to the
Dutchman, who told me that I must return forthwith, as the chief was
waiting to receive me.  I of course could do nothing else than face
about, and with my new friend accompany the guard.  The men were armed
with formidable long spears and daggers, but the officer carried a
musket, which looked more like an ensign of authority than a weapon to
be used.  As I returned through the courtyard I considered what I should
say to the chief.  "Tell the truth and be not afraid," said conscience.
I determined to do so.

When I re-entered the hall of audience, the chief was seated on his
divan, and evidently intended to receive me in greater state.  Some of
the assemblage sat down cross-legged on cushions in front of the divan,
while others stood with their bodies bent forward on either side, the
guards who remained turning their backs on the great man.  The Dutchman
and I took our seats on cushions directly below the divan.  I found
afterwards that among the Javanese a sitting posture is considered more
respectful than an upright one.  The chief, through the Dutch
interpreter, now asked me a number of questions, which, according to my
previous determination, I answered correctly.  The great man, I thought,
looked somewhat surprised at finding that I was not so important a
person as he had at first supposed.

Occasionally my Dutch friend remarked that I had better not reply to
some of the questions put to me, but I answered that I was perfectly
ready to stand by the consequences of anything I might say.  Such has
been my practice through life--I might say, more modestly, my
endeavour--to do right on all occasions, to avow whatever I have done,
and to take the consequences, whatever they may be.  I do not say that
such a mode of proceeding may not occasionally get a man seemingly into
trouble, but I do say that it is the only right course, and that he is
equally certain to get out of it again; whereas an opposite course must
lead him into difficulties, and involve him more and more as he tries to
extricate himself by prevarication, subterfuge, or falsehood.  I
therefore told the chief that I had come on shore hoping to open up a
trade with him, under the belief that the country was no longer either
in possession of the Dutch or French, but that it was now under the rule
of England.  If I was mistaken I was ready to undergo the penalty, and
must run the risk of being treated as a prisoner of war should I fall
into the hands of the French, but that as the English were the friends
of the rulers and people of Java, I expected to be treated by him as a
friend.

This answer, which I had reason to believe the Dutchman faithfully
interpreted, seemed to please the chief.  However, he made no direct
reply to me, but spoke for some time aside to his companions, whom I
took to be officially counsellors or advisers.  One made a remark, then
another, and at last one said something at which I thought my friend the
Dutchman looked rather blank.  A good deal of discussion took place,
when I heard the chief issue some orders to the officers of the guards.
Immediately on this two of the counsellors got up, and with the officer
and several other persons, and part of the guard, left the hall.

The movement seemed to give great satisfaction to the counsellors,
especially to the gentleman who had made the suggestion, as I fancied,
which led to it, while a pleased smile played over the countenance of
the chief.  All the time the honest Dutchman looked very much annoyed.
At length I asked him what it was all about.

"I suppose that I shall not be found fault with for telling you," he
answered.  "And I assure you that I would much rather not have to give
you such unpleasant information.  Do not look surprised or annoyed, and
no harm can come of it.  The fact is that the chief here, the governor
of this district, Mulock Ben Azel, is not a bright genius, and though he
had made up his mind to detain you, it had not occurred to him to detain
your vessel.  The idea, however, was suggested to him just now by one of
these cunning gentlemen, and he has sent a party to stop her.  The
Javanese are rather daring fellows, so that the captain must be smart if
he would get away from them."

This was indeed a disagreeable announcement.  I congratulated myself,
however, at having sent off Jack to warn Captain Hassall, and I had
great hopes that he would have followed my advice and got the _Barbara_
under way before the Javanese could reach her.  I thanked the Dutchman
for his sympathy and kindness.

"I have a warm regard for the English," he answered: "I have received
much kindness at the hands of your countrymen, and am glad of an
opportunity of proving my gratitude.  As far as you are concerned I may
be of service, but if these gentry get hold of your vessel, I am afraid
that they will not let her go till they have cleaned out her hold."

I, of course, on hearing all this became very impatient to go and see
whether the _Barbara_ was leaving the harbour, but as far as I could I
concealed my feelings, and desired my Dutch friend to inquire of Mulock
Ben Azel whether he desired my presence any longer; and if not, I begged
leave to go forth into the open air that I might gaze on the beautiful
scenery amidst which he had the happiness of dwelling and I had the
happiness of finding myself.  I fancy that the interpreter gave my
request a more oriental turn.  The chief was at all events pleased to
comply with it, and directed some of his attendants and my Dutch friend
to accompany me.  I made a profound salaam, as if I was highly pleased
at all that had occurred.  The act was somewhat hypocritical, I must
confess, but, at all events, I was heartily glad to get over the
audience, which was becoming very tedious.  As soon as I got out on the
terrace I have before described as affording a magnificent view of the
surrounding country, I eagerly looked seaward in search of the
_Barbara_.  I almost gave a shout of satisfaction as I saw her with a
strong breeze off shore, standing away under all the canvas she could
carry.  She had good reason to make the best use of her heels, for a
whole fleet of boats, some of considerable size and full of men, were in
hot chase after her.  I stood with my companions eagerly watching the
chase, though the objects of our interest were very different.  I was
anxious that the _Barbara_ should escape, they that she should be
caught.  I knew for one, though, that if good seamanship would enable
him to get away, Captain Hassall would give his pursuers the slip.  I
knew too that he would not be taken, even if the boats should catch him
up, without a fight.  My earnest hope was therefore that the breeze
might continue.  In that climate, however, the land wind often falls
towards the evening, and if it should do so, it would give the Javanese
a great advantage.  I found my new friend by my side, and I glanced at
him.

"Your vessel sails well, and I am glad of it," he observed.  "The orders
were to bring her in at all risks; at the same time, if her captain
shows a bold front I do not think the natives will dare to attack him at
a distance from the land."

My hopes and fears alternately rose and fell as I watched the chase.
Sometimes the boats seemed to be gaining on her.  At other times she
appeared to be obtaining the advantage.  She continued to increase her
canvas till every stitch she could carry was set on her, studding sails
on either side, royals, and even still lighter sails above them, which
we used to call skyscrapers.  I now observed that although there were
several large boats engaged in the chase, they were but slow sailers,
and that the small ones were drawing ahead of them.  These of course
would be more easily dealt with by the _Barbara's_ crew than the larger
craft.

The latter were vessels of about forty tons, carrying fifty or sixty
persons.  The hulls of those I had seen on landing were neatly built,
with round heads and sterns; and over the hulls were light small houses,
composed of bamboos, and divided into three or four cabins.  The sides
were formed of split bamboos about four feet high, with windows in them
to open and shut at pleasure; the roofs were almost flat, and thatched
with palm leaves.  The oars are worked by the crew standing at the fore
and after-part of the vessel.  I thought that probably the boats now in
chase of the _Barbara_ were modifications of this sort of craft, and
more adapted to warlike purposes than they were.  The natives became at
length even more excited than I was as the breeze occasionally fell and
gave their boats an advantage.  They knew also that the land breeze
would soon set in, which I did not.  They probably fancied that when it
did the vessel would be caught in a trap, not knowing that she could
haul her wind and still keep ahead of them.

I stood watching the various circumstances of the chase, till at length,
greatly to my relief, I saw the boats, as if by signal, begin to return
together towards the shore, while the _Barbara_ continued standing off
shore till she met the sea-breeze, when she hauled her wind and stood
away to the northward.  My Dutch friend congratulated me on her escape.

"And as it appears that you are not to be detained as a prisoner, the
sooner you get out of this place the better," he observed.  "I will
gladly welcome you to my abode, where you can remain till we gain
further information as to the result of the British expedition against
Batavia.  If it is ultimately successful, your ship will put in at that
place, and you can rejoin her."

I gladly accepted his offer.  As we passed through the large entrance
court he pointed out two large Indian-fig-trees, and told me that under
them was the place where criminals were executed.  On each side of the
court was a row of the same description of tree.  We descended the hill
towards the harbour.  On approaching it I heard the shrill voice of a
boy crying out loudly amid the shouts and chattering of a number of
natives.  I soon recognised the voice of Jack Nobs, who had, I had
hoped, made his escape in the boats.  The people, seeing me accompanied
by guards, made way for Jack, who ran towards me, crying out--

"Oh, save me, Mr Braithwaite! save me, sir!  These savinges are a-going
to cut off my head, or to hang me up and cook and eat me.  They eat
people in these parts, and they look as if they would make nothing of
devouring me."

In vain I tried to pacify him.  He seemed to fear that the natives were
going to treat me in the same way he thought that they were about to
treat him.

"But what made you come back, Jack?"  I asked.  "I thought that you had
gone off to the ship."

"What, leave you all alone among the savinges!" he answered, looking up
reproachfully at me.  "No, no, sir.  After you have been so kind to me,
and always took me with you wherever you've been, and we was nearly all
drowned together!  No, no, if harm is to come of it, I says to myself,
I'll go shares with Mr Braithwaite, whatever happens; so, when the
boats shoved off, I scud away, and when the men called me to come along
with them, and not to mind you, for that I could do you no good, I
wouldn't go back, but kept beckoning them to be off; so away they went,
and I ran up in shore and hid myself.  The savinges, howsomdever, found
me out at last, and as long as they thought that they should get hold of
the ship they treated me civil enough, as they might a pet monkey; but
when they found that they could not catch her, they turned their rage on
me, and what they're going to do with us I'm sure I don't know.  Oh
dear! oh dear!"

Jack's fears were very natural, for the dark-skinned, half-naked
Javanese, with their glittering kreeses or daggers in their hands, which
they flourished about while they vociferated loudly, were very
ferocious-looking fellows.

"They are disappointed," said the Dutchman, "at the escape of your ship,
and they accuse the boy of being the cause of the boats going off and
giving her warning.  Let him, however, keep close to me, and I will do
my best to protect him."

My new friend, who, by-the-bye, told me his name was Peter Van Deck, now
addressed the people and told them that the boy was not to blame;
whatever he had done was in consequence of the orders he had received,
and that he had no intention of offending them.  I had slipped a few
small pieces of coin, which I had fortunately in my pocket, into his
hand, and on his distributing these among the most influential of the
assemblage, public opinion was turned completely in our favour, and we
were allowed to proceed without further molestation.  A small sum
bestowed on the officer of the guard had a like beneficial effect, and
after receiving an assurance from Mynheer Van Deck that we would not run
away, and would be found at his house if wanted, he and his men, very
much to my relief, took their departure, while the Dutchman, Jack, and I
set off in an opposite direction.

The island of Java, it must be remembered, runs about due east and west.
Our course was towards the west, or in the direction of Batavia.  There
was, however, not far off--about twenty miles I understood--a town and
fort, garrisoned by French troops, called Cheribon.  The scenery was
very fine, heightened by the luxuriance of tropical vegetation.  On our
left rose a succession of heights, beyond which appeared the summits of
the ridge of lofty mountains which runs down the centre of the island,
dividing it longitudinally into two parts, of which, however, the
northern is the largest, most fertile, and best known.  My Dutch friend
was very communicative respecting the productions of the country, and
the manners and customs of the inhabitants.  I noted down, therefore,
the information I received from him, which I give in as concise a form
as I can.

The climate is certainly hot, as might be expected from being so near
the equator, but it is much more endurable than I had expected to find
it, and on the sides of the mountains it is often quite cool, so that
thick clothing is necessary.  As also the nights are nearly the same
length as the days, there is time for the air to cool while the sun is
below the horizon.  The bad or unhealthy monsoon blows from the west,
from the end of November to the beginning of March.  This is the rainy
season.  After it the easterly winds blow for some time.  The breaking
up of the monsoon is the most unhealthy season of all.  There are no
navigable rivers, but numerous streams descend from the mountains and
irrigate the land.  One of the chief productions of this country is
pepper.  It is produced from a plant of the vine kind, _Piper nigrum_,
which twines its tendrils round poles or trees, like ivy or hops.  The
pepper-corns grow in bunches close to each other.  They are first green,
but afterwards turn black.  When dried they are separated from the dust
and partly from the outward membranous coat by means of a kind of
winnow, and are then laid up in warehouses.  The white pepper is the
same production as the black.  It undergoes a process to change its
colour, being laid in lime, which takes off the outer black coat and
leaves it white.

Rice is also produced in large quantities.  It grows chiefly in low
fenny ground.  After it has been sown, and has shot up about half a foot
from the ground, it is transplanted by little bundles of one or more
plants in rows; then, by damming up the many rivulets which abound in
this country, the rice is inundated in the rainy season, and kept under
water till the stalks have attained sufficient strength, when the land
is drained by opening the dams, and it is soon dried by the great heat
of the sun.  At the time of the rice harvest the fields have much the
same appearance as our wheat and barley fields, and indeed are uniformly
covered with a still more brilliantly golden hue.  The sickle is not
used in reaping the rice, but instead of it a small knife, with which
the stalk is cut about a foot under the ear; this is done one by one,
and the ears are then bound in sheaves, the tenth of which is the pay of
the mower.  The _paddee_, which is the name given to the rice while in
the husk, does not grow, like wheat and barley, in compact ears, but,
like oats, in loose spikes.  It is not threshed to separate it from the
husks, but pounded in large wooden blocks hollowed out, and the more it
is pounded the whiter it becomes when boiled.  Rice, with fish or a
little meat chopped up, constitute the chief food of the inhabitants.
Sugar, coffee, and indigo are also largely produced.

For the purposes of agriculture buffaloes are used instead of horses.
They are very large animals, bigger and heavier than our largest oxen,
furnished with great ears, and horns which project straight forward and
bend inwards.  A hole is bored through the cartilage of the nose, and
these huge animals are guided by a cord which is passed through it.
They have little eyes, and their colour is generally ashy grey.  They
are so accustomed to be led three times a day into the water to cool
themselves, that they cannot without doing so be brought to work.  The
people themselves, by-the-bye, are great bathers, both men and women,
the children, who seldom wear clothes till they are seven or eight,
being constantly in the water.  That said custom must be a great saving
of expense to the parents of a large family.  The people are generally
of a light brown colour, of the middle height, and well proportioned,
with a broad forehead and a flattish nose, which has a slight curve
downward at the tip.  Their hair is black, and is always kept smooth and
shining with cocoa-nut oil.  The dress of the women consists of a piece
of cotton cloth wrapped round the body and covering the bosom, under
which it is secured; it then hangs down to the knees, and sometimes to
the ankles, while the shoulders and part of the back remain uncovered.
The hair of their head, which they wear very long, is turned up and
twisted round like a fillet, fastened with long bodkins of different
sorts of wood, tortoiseshell, silver, or gold, according to the rank of
the lady.  It is often adorned with a variety of flowers.  The Javanese
are nominally Mohammedans, but in the interior especially a number of
idolatrous practices are still kept up.

Pleasantly conversing we at length reached the residence of Mynheer Van
Deck.  It was built in the best style of native architecture, that is to
say, on a raised platform of stone or brick; the outer walls were of
brick, with a verandah of bamboo, all round which the partitions, as was
most of the furniture, were of bamboo, which had a very cool appearance,
and was sufficient for a hot climate.  My host was a bachelor, not from
choice, he assured me, but from necessity, on account of the scarcity of
European ladies in the island.

"Those who are born here are so ill-educated, and so indolent, that a
man is better without their society," he remarked.

In spite of this drawback he received me very hospitably and kindly, and
though I was vexed at having again been separated from my ship, I
confessed to myself that I had very little cause to complain of my lot.
I was leaning back on an easy bamboo chair and gazing out through a
vista of palm-trees on the deep blue sea, when the clatter of horses'
feet coming along the road caught our ears.  As they drew near the clank
of sabres was heard at the same time.  The voice of an officer crying
"Halt" was next heard, and soon afterwards we saw him approaching the
house.  My host, with a look of considerable annoyance, rose to receive
him.  He was a young and pleasant-looking man.

"Ah, Mynheer Van Deck, bon jour," he said.  "You have in your house, I
am given to understand, a foreigner, supposed to be an English spy.  I
am come to demand him from you."

"I am the person to whom you allude, monsieur," I said, rising from my
seat and going forward.  "You are, however, wrongly informed.  I am an
Englishman, but not a spy.  I landed, not knowing that this part of the
island was in possession of the French, and had I not been detained I
should have returned to my ship."

"I am not here to dispute the point, monsieur," he said, bowing
politely.  "I must perform my duty, and that is to convey you with me to
Cheribon, where my superior officers will investigate the matter.  You
have supped, I conclude; we will therefore take advantage of the cool of
the evening, and make good as much of our journey as the waning day will
allow us to perform."

My Dutch friend shrugged his shoulders.  There was not much time for
consideration.  I saw that I had no resource but to obey, though I must
own that I did so with a very bad grace.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

PIRATES.

My host, in spite of his annoyance, did not forget the duties of
hospitality, and warmly pressed our unwelcome visitor to take some
refreshment.  The young officer, however, declined, on the plea that the
day was already far spent, and that he had no time to spare.  On going
round to the front of the house, I found two led horses under the charge
of a soldier.  They were absurdly small for cavalry, and would have been
quickly ridden over by any one of our heavy regiments.

I was about to bid Mynheer Van Deck farewell.

"No, not yet, my friend," he answered.  "I purpose accompanying you to
Cheribon, that I may render you any service in my power.  I have a
horse, and will follow immediately."

The officer made a sign of impatience, so I mounted one of the steeds,
and Jack sprang on the back of the other, where he sat very much as a
big monkey would have done, fully resolved, it seemed, to enjoy any fun
which might be forthcoming.  As the French soldiers treated him kindly,
and spoke in a good-natured tone to him, though he could not understand
what they said, his fears quickly vanished, and he was speedily "hail
fellow well met" with them all.

The officer I found a very gentlemanly young man.  He rode up alongside
me after we had proceeded a little way, and seemed eager enough to talk
about La Belle France and Paris; but when I endeavoured to draw any
information from him respecting the proceedings at the west end of the
island, he closed his mouth, or gave only vague answers.  From this I
argued that affairs had not gone with the French in quite as
satisfactory a manner as they wished.  I asked him at last whether he
thought that I should be detained or be otherwise inconvenienced by the
commandant at Cheribon.

"We shoot spies," he answered laconically, at the same time shrugging
his shoulders as a Frenchman only can do.  "C'est la fortune de la
guerre."

"But, my dear sir, I am no spy," I answered.  "The governor, or native
chief, purposed to seize my vessel, and I was left on shore while she
made her escape.  I am but a supercargo anxious to sell the goods
entrusted to me."

The young officer gave a smile of incredulity, yet with an air of so
much politeness that I really could not be angry with him; indeed it
would have done me no good if I were.  We were in a short time joined by
Mynheer Van Deck, who came galloping up on a much finer horse than any
possessed by the French soldiers.  I found from my captor that the
journey would be far longer than I had expected, as we had to make a
considerable _detour_ to visit a native chief, or prince, to whom he had
a message.  My belief was that he was beating up for native recruits to
oppose the British force, which, if not arrived, must have been hourly
expected.  We had several natives with us, armed with long spears and
daggers, a few only having firelocks.  Van Deck told me that we should
soon have to pass a river, rather a dangerous spot, on account of the
number of tigers which came there to drink, and which had already
carried off several natives.

"But surely they would not venture to attack so large a body of men as
this," I remarked.

"Not if we could keep together, unless they happen to be very hungry,"
he answered.  "Unfortunately, however, the path in some places is so
narrow that we have to proceed in single file, and as there are fallen
trees and other impediments in the way, travellers are apt to get
separated, when, of course, they are more liable to be picked off.  I
always keep my pistol cocked in my hand, that I may have a chance of
shooting my assailant."

"But I came on shore unarmed, and have no pistols," I answered.

"Then keep ahead of me, and if I see a tiger spring at you I will fire
at him, and do my best to save you."

"But the poor boy who is with me--he has a poor chance, I am afraid," I
observed, after I had thanked my friend for his offer.

"Oh, he is safe enough if he keeps close to the soldiers; the clatter of
their arms frightens the beasts."

While the Dutchman was speaking we came in sight of the river.  It was
fordable, though rather deep, and as the leading men on their small
horses plunged in the water was up to their saddle-girths.  I naturally
looked out on either side for our expected enemies.  Three or four large
animals sprang off just as the leading horses reached the opposite bank.
I thought they were tigers.

"Oh, no, they are only wild cats," said Van Deck.  "Rather unpleasant to
be caught by one of them asleep, but they are easily frightened."

I thought to myself, If those creatures are Java wild cats, what must
Java tigers be like?  We all passed across the stream without any
accident, a small body of half-clad natives bringing up the rear.  They
were climbing up the somewhat steep bank, when a fearful shriek,
followed by loud shouts and cries, made me turn my head, and I caught
sight of a monster bounding along the bank, with the writhing,
struggling body of a human being between his huge jaws.  The poor
wretch's _sarong_, or plaid, had become loose, and dragged after him.
Already several natives were setting off in chase, while others were
discharging their firearms at the animal, though at the risk of killing
the man.  The French officer called out to them to desist, and seizing a
lance from one of the people, gallantly dashed after the tiger.  I
naturally wished to join in the chase, but Van Deck entreated me to
stop, telling me that I should very likely, if I went, be picked off by
another tiger on my return.  As it would have been folly to disregard
his advice, we pushed on as fast as we could to get out of the narrow
defile.  We could for several minutes hear the shouts of the natives
still in pursuit of the tiger.  After some time they rejoined us, but
they had not saved the poor man, and had, moreover, lost another of
their number, who had been carried off by a tiger just as the first
leaped over a cliff fifty feet above the valley, with the man still in
its mouth.  It was followed triumphantly by its companion.

"This is not the country I should choose to travel in, still less to
live in," I said.

"It cannot be helped," observed the Dutchman.  "I am well off here, a
great man among small people.  I should be a beggar elsewhere.  This is
not, however, the country in which a man of education and mind would
choose to pitch his tent."

Torches were lit for the latter part of our journey.  It will be
remembered that so nearly under the equator as we were the days and
nights are of equal length all the year round; we therefore did not
enjoy the delightful twilight of a northern clime.

Notice had been given of our proposed visit to the chief, or prince, who
was, I was told, of Malay descent.  Preparations were therefore made for
our reception, and very handsome they were.  Though a prisoner, I was
treated like the rest of the guests.  The house was much in the style of
those I have before described.  But I was not prepared to find a table
elegantly set out and spread with fine linen and beautiful silver plate.
It was lighted by four large wax flambeaux in massive silver
candlesticks.  The provisions were dressed in the Malay fashion, many of
the dishes being very palatable, and toasts were drunk with three times
three, the Malays of inferior rank, who sat round the room on the ground
against the walls to the number of thirty, joining in the huzzas.  It
was altogether a curious scene of barbaric splendour.  The prince
escorted us to our rooms, where we found capital beds, beautiful linen,
and very fine mosquito-nets, ornamented with fringe.  The Malay servants
slept under the beds on mats, or in the corners of the rooms, to be in
readiness if required.  Breakfast was prepared at daybreak, that we
might continue our journey in the cool of the morning.

We rested under the shade of some trees during the day, the soldiers
keeping up a fearful din to scare away any wild beast who might chance
to be prowling about in search of a dinner.  The young officer had
fortunately a French cook among his men, who very soon contrived to
place before us a capital dinner, though of what it was composed I could
not discover.  I rather think that hashed monkey formed one of the
dishes.  As, towards night, we approached Cheribon, my kind Dutch friend
did his best to keep up my spirits, assuring me that he would spare no
pains to prove that I was not a spy.  He was not quite sure that the
accounts received of the defeat of the English were correct; and the
French commandant would scarcely venture to hang me without very strong
proofs of my guilt, and with the possibility of being made a prisoner
himself by my countrymen ere long, should they have been victorious.
Still it was with no very pleasant feelings that I was formally
conducted into the fort as a prisoner.

The forts of Cheribon had been allowed to fall into decay by the Dutch,
but since the French occupation of the island had been repaired and
considerably strengthened.  I was told that the commandant boasted that
he could hold out against any force likely to be sent against him, even
should my countrymen gain the day.  I was taken at once before him and
examined, but though he had no evidence to prove me guilty, as I was
accused of being a spy he would not take my parole.  I was by his orders
accordingly locked up in a cell with iron bars to the windows, a
three-legged stool, and a heap of straw in a corner for a bed.  Mr Van
Deck had not entered the fort.  In a little time Jack was thrust into
the cell with very little ceremony.  He brought me a message from my
Dutch friend, saying that there had been a battle, and he suspected that
the French had been defeated.  I heartily hoped that he was correct.  I
had reason to believe that my prison, bad as it was, was the best in the
fort, for Jack told me that he had seen guards going round with messes
of food which they had put into wretched dark holes, and in one, as he
was led along, he saw a miserable gaunt man, with long matted hair, put
out a lean yellow hand to take the food.  This information made me hope
more than ever than Van Deck was right in his suspicions, for I had no
fancy to be shut up in a dark cell for months in such a climate, with
the possibility of being taken out and shot as a spy.  Had I been a
naval or military man I should not have been thus treated.  Several very
unpleasant days and nights passed by, a scanty allowance of coarse food
only being brought to me and my young companion.

At length, one day the sergeant threw open my prison door, and Van Deck
appearing, took me by the hand and led me out of my noisome dungeon,
followed by Jack, who gave a shout of joy as he found himself in the
open air.

"I sent to Batavia, where your ship has arrived, and where your
statement was fully corroborated, and the commandant had therefore no
further excuse for keeping you a prisoner," said my friend.  "But there
is another reason why he would not venture to do so much longer.  Look
there!"

He pointed seaward where several large ships were seen approaching the
land.  He handed me a glass.  I examined them eagerly; they were
frigates, with the flag of Old England flying at their peaks.  Jack,
when he heard this, gave a loud huzza, and threw up his cap with
delight, jumping and clapping his hands, and committing other
extravagances, till I ordered him to be quiet lest the French soldiers
should put a sudden stop to the exhibition of his feelings.

The frigates approached till they had got just within long gunshot range
of the fort, when after some time a boat put off from one of them and
approached the fort, bearing a flag of truce.  That was, at all events,
pleasant.  There was a chance of a battle being avoided, yet the
commandant had so loudly sworn that nothing should make him yield to the
English that I was afraid he might be obstinate and insist on holding
out.  We were on the point of hurrying down to meet the boat, when a
sergeant with a guard stopped us and told us politely enough that we
must stay where we were, or that Jack and I must go back to prison.

"We must obey orders," observed Van Deck.  "The fact is, that the
commandant is aware that you are acquainted with the weak points of the
fort, that the gun-carriages are rotten, and many of the guns are
themselves honeycombed or dismounted."

We were conducted out of the way when the officer with the flag of truce
entered the fort.  Looking from the ramparts, however, we could see the
boat and the people in her through Van Deck's glass, and a young middy
was amusing himself, so it appeared to me, by daring some little Dutch,
or rather native boys to come off and fight him, which they seemed in no
way disposed to do, for whenever he held up his fists they ran off at a
great rate.  Of one thing I was very sure, that if the French commandant
did not yield with a good grace he would be very soon compelled to do
so.  That squadron of frigates had not come merely to give a civil
message and to sail away again.  We walked up and down, impatiently
waiting to hear what was to be done.

At length, after an hour's delay, the officer who had brought the
message--Captain Warren, of the _President_--issued from the
commandant's house with his coxswain bearing a flag under his arm.  Down
came the tricolour of France, and up went the glorious flag of England.
Jack was beside himself on seeing this, and I could scarcely refrain
from joining in his "Hurra! hurra!" as I hurried forward to meet the
English captain, whose acquaintance I had made at the Mauritius.  The
French commandant intimated, on this, that I was at liberty; but as I
felt it would be ungrateful to leave my friend Van Deck abruptly, I
resolved to remain on shore for the present with him.

In a very short time the marines came on shore to secure the thus easily
acquired possession, but scarcely had they formed on the beach than it
was ascertained that a large body of the enemy had entered the town.
The order was given to charge through them, and, taken by surprise, the
French and Dutchmen threw down their arms, and several officers and
others were taken prisoners.  Among them was General Jumel, second in
command to General Janssen, and Colonel Knotzer, aide-de-camp to the
latter, who with others were at once carried off to the ships.

Cheribon I found to be a much larger place than I at first supposed; the
streets are narrow but numerous, and in the outskirts especially the
houses of the natives are so completely surrounded by trees and bushes
that it is impossible to calculate their number.  I heard that the
_Phoebe_ was one of the squadron, and soon had the satisfaction of
shaking hands with my brother William, Toby Trundle, and other officers
belonging to her.  From them I heard a full account of the engagement
which had given the greater part of the magnificent island of Java to
the English.  I was the more interested as my military brother had taken
part in it, and distinguished himself.  I hoped to meet him when I got
to Batavia.

The army which was commanded by Sir Samuel Auchmuty, consisting of
11,000 men, half being Europeans, disembarked on the evening of the 5th
of August at the village of Chillingchin, twelve miles north of Batavia.
Colonel Gillespie advanced on the city of Batavia, of which he took
possession, and beat off the enemy, who attempted to retake it.  A
general engagement took place on the 10th at Welteureden, when the
French were defeated and compelled to retire to the strongly entrenched
camp of Cornells.  It was supposed to contain 250 pieces of cannon.
Here General Janssen commanded in person, with General Jumel, a
Frenchman, under him, with an army of 13,000 men.  Notwithstanding this,
the forts were stormed and taken, and the greater number of the officers
captured.  The commander-in-chief, with General Jumel, escaped--the
latter, as I have mentioned, to fall very soon afterwards into our
hands.

An expedition, consisting of marines and bluejackets, was now organised
to meet a body of the fugitive army said to be marching from Cornells.
As William was of the party, I got leave to accompany it.  That we might
move the faster, horses had been obtained, and both marines and
bluejackets were mounted--that is to say, they had horses given them to
ride, but as the animals, though small, were frisky and untrained, they
were sent very frequently sprawling into the dust, and were much oftener
on their feet than in their saddles.  Our force, as we advanced,
certainly presented a very unmilitary appearance, though we made clatter
enough for a dozen regiments of dragoons.  We were in search of the
military chest said to be with the fugitives.  We fell in with a large
party, who, however, having had fighting enough, sent forward a flag of
truce and capitulated.  We got possession, however, of some waggon-loads
of ingots, but they were ingots of copper, and were said to be of so
little value in the country as to have been fired as grape-shot from
Cornells.  The moon shone brightly forth for the first part of the
march, but no sooner did it become obscured than a considerable number
of the marines were seized with a temporary defective vision very common
within the tropics, called, "Nyctalopia," or night blindness.  The
attack was sudden; the vision seldom became totally obscured, but so
indistinct that the shape of objects could not be distinguished.  While
in this state the sufferers had to be led by their comrades.  With some
it lasted more than an hour, with others not more than twenty minutes,
and on the approach of day all traces of it had disappeared.

On our march, during the heat of the day, we passed through a wood,
every tree in which seemed to have been blasted by lightning.  Not a
branch nor leaf remained to afford us shelter from the scorching rays of
the sun.  Had I not known that the story of the noxious effects produced
by the upas-tree was a fiction, I might have supposed that the
destruction had been caused by a blast passing amid the boughs of one of
those so-called death-dealing trees in the neighbourhood.  Probably the
forest had been destroyed partly by lightning and partly by the
conflagration it had caused.

On returning to Cheribon, I found that my friend Van Deck was anxious to
proceed to Batavia, and I was fortunate in being able to procure him a
passage on board the _Phoebe_, which was going there at once.

"Well, Braithwaite, I shall never despair of your turning up safe!"
exclaimed Captain Hassall, shaking my hand warmly as I stepped on the
deck of the _Barbara_.  "You saved the ship and cargo by your
promptness, for had I not got your message by young Jack there I should
have been captured to a certainty.  Garrard, Janrin and Company have
reason to be grateful to you, and I have no doubt that they will be so."

Everybody knows that Batavia is a large Dutch town built in the
tropics--that is to say, it has broad streets, with rows of trees in
them, and canals in the centre of stagnant water, full of filth, and
surrounded by miasma-exuding marshes.  But the neighbourhood is healthy,
and the merchants and officials mostly only come into the town in the
daytime, and return to their country houses at night.  Some seasons are
worse than others, nobody knows why.  Captain Cook was there on his
first voyage round the world during a very bad one, and, in spite of all
his care, lost a number of people.  We were more fortunate, but did not
escape without some sickness.

Captain Hassall had disposed of most of that portion of our cargo suited
for the Batavian market, so that I soon got rid of the rest.  I then
made arrangements for the purchase of sugar, tea, coffee, spices, and
several other commodities which I believed would sell well at Sydney, to
which place we proposed to proceed, touching at a few other points
perhaps on our way.

The articles had, however, first to be collected, as the army had
consumed the greater portion in store at Batavia.  Part of the purchase
I made from a brother of my friend Van Deck.  He was on the point of
sailing in a brig he owned along the coast to collect produce, and
invited me to accompany him.  I gladly accepted his offer, as the
_Barbara_ could not sail till his return.

In those days, as well, indeed, as from the memory of man, these seas
swarmed with pirates, many of whom had their headquarters on the coast
of Borneo.  Among them was a chief, or rajah, named Raga, notorious for
the boldness and success of his undertakings.  We, however, believed
that with so many British men-of-war about he would seek some more
distant field for his operations.  The harbour was full of native craft
of all sorts.  Of the native prahus alone there are many varieties, some
built after European models, and carrying sails similar to those of our
English luggers.  Others are of native construction, with lateen sails;
and many, built with high stems and sterns, have the square mat-sail,
such as impels the Batavian fishing prahus.  Of course, among so many
craft a pirate chief could easily find spies ready to give him
information of all that was going forward.  However, we troubled our
heads very little about the pirates.

By-the-bye, I have not said anything about the alligators of Java, which
are, I believe, larger than in any other part of the world.  The
Government will not allow those in the harbour of Batavia to be
disturbed, as they act the part of scavengers by eating up the garbage
which floats on the water, and might otherwise produce a pestilence.  I
often passed them floating on the surface, and snapping at the morsels
which came in their way, quite indifferent to the boats going to and fro
close to them.  Captain Beaver, of the _Nisus_ frigate, described to me
one he saw in another part of the island when on an exploring
expedition.  It was first discovered basking on a mud-bank, and neither
he nor the officers with him would believe that it was an animal, but
thought at first that it was the huge trunk of a tree.  At the lowest
computation it was forty feet in length.  The circumference of the
thickest part of the body seemed nearly that of a bullock, and this
continued for about double the length.  The extent of the jaws was
calculated to be at least eight feet.  The eyes glistened like two large
emeralds, but with a lustre which nothing inanimate could express.  The
officers examined it through their glasses, and came to the conclusion
that it was asleep, but the native guides assured them that it was not.
To prove this, one of them fearlessly leaped on shore and approached the
creature, when it glided into the water, creating a commotion like that
produced by the launch of a small vessel.

I bade farewell to William and my friends of the _Phoebe_, not without
some sadness at my heart.  In those time of active warfare it might be
we should never meet again.  Of my soldier brother I got but a hurried
glimpse before he embarked on an expedition which was sent to capture
Sourabaya, at the other end of the island.  A few words of greeting, and
inquiries and remarks, a warm long grasp of hands, and we parted.
Directly I stepped on board Van Deck's brig the _Theodora_, the anchor
was weighed, and we stood out of the harbour with a strong land breeze.
The easterly monsoon which prevailed was in our teeth, so that we were
only able to progress by taking advantage of the land and sea-breezes.
The land breeze commenced about midnight, and as it blew directly from
the shore, we were able to steer our course the greater part of the
night; but after sunrise the wind always drew round to the eastward, and
we were consequently forced off the shore.  The anchor was then dropped
till towards noon, when the sea-breeze set in.  Again we weighed, and
stood towards the shore, as near as possible to which we anchored, and
waited for the land breeze at night.

We had thus slowly proceeded for three or four days, having called off
two estates for cargo, when, as we lay at anchor, a fleet of five or six
prahus was seen standing towards us with the sea-breeze, which had not
yet filled our sails.  Van Deck, after examining them through his glass,
said that he did not at all like their appearance, and that he feared
they intended us no good.  On they came, still directly for us.  We got
up all the arms on deck and distributed them to the crew, who, to the
number of thirty, promised to fight to the last.  Then we weighed anchor
and made sail, ready for the breeze.  It came at last, but not till the
prahus were close up to us.  Under sail we were more likely to beat them
off than at anchor.  They soon swarmed round us, but their courage was
damped by the sight of our muskets and guns.  Of their character,
however, we had not a shadow of doubt.  After a short time of most
painful suspense to us they lowered their sails and allowed us to sail
on towards the shore.  Here we anchored, as usual, to wait for the land
breeze.  Had there been a harbour, we would gladly have taken shelter
within it, for the merchant, the elder Van Deck, said that he knew the
pirates too well, and that they might still be waiting for an
opportunity to attack us.  There was, however, no harbour, and so we had
to wait in our exposed situation, in the full belief that the pirates
were still in the offing, and might any moment pounce down upon us.  The
Van Decks agreed that we might beat them off, but that if they should
gain the upper hand they would murder every one on board the vessel.
"We might abandon the vessel and so escape any risk," observed the
merchant--not in a tone as if he intended to do so.  "You, at all
events, Mr Braithwaite, can be landed, and you can easily get back to
Batavia."  Against this proposal of course my manhood rebelled, though I
had a presentiment, if I may use the expression, that we should be
attacked.  "No, no!  I will stay by you and share your fate, whatever
that may be," I replied.  Night came on, and darkness hid all distant
objects from view.

We were in the handsome, well-fitted-up cabin, enjoying our evening
meal, when the mate, a Javanese, put his head down the skylight and said
some words in his native tongue, which made the Dutchmen start from
their seats, and, seizing their pistols and swords, rush on deck.  I had
no difficulty, when I followed them, in interpreting what had been said.
The pirate prahus were close upon us.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

MUTINY ON BOARD THE "BARBARA."

We have learned from the sad experience of centuries that nominal
Christianity, which men call religion, is utterly powerless to stop
warfare; it may, in a few instances, have lessened some of its horrors,
but only a few.  The annals of the wars which have taken place for the
last three hundred years since the world has improved in civilisation,
show that nations rush into war as eagerly as ever, and that cruelties
and abominations of all sorts, such as the fiercest savages cannot
surpass, are committed by men who profess to be Christians.  Read the
accounts of the wars of the Duke of Alva and his successors in the
Netherlands, the civil wars of France, the foreign wars of Napoleon, the
deeds of horror done at the storming and capture of towns during the war
in the Peninsula, not only by Frenchmen and Spaniards, but by the
British soldiers, and indeed the accounts of all the wars in the pages
of history, and we shall learn what a fearful and dreadful thing war is,
and strive to assist the spread of the true principles of the Gospel as
the only means of putting a stop to it.

Such thoughts as these had been occupying my mind on board the brig, on
the morning of that eventful day of which I have just been speaking.
Here was I, a peace-loving man, engaged in a peaceable occupation, and
yet finding myself continually in the midst of fighting, and now there
was every probability of my having to engage in a desperate battle, the
termination of which it was impossible to foretell.  As I reached the
deck I could see a number of dark phantom-looking objects gliding slowly
over the water towards us almost noiselessly, the only sound heard being
that produced by their oars as they dipped into the water.  The pirates,
for such we were still certain they must be, expected, perhaps, to find
us asleep.  The guns were loaded and run out as before.  The men stood
with their muskets in their hands, and pikes and cutlasses ready for
use.  The strangers drew closer and closer.  They still hoped, we
concluded, to catch us unprepared.  We, however, did not wish to begin
the combat unless they gave us indubitable signs of their intentions.

The elder Van Deck, who had, I found, been a naval man, took the
command, and everybody on board looked up to him.  We were not left long
in doubt that the strangers were pirates, and purposed to destroy us.
Not, however, till they were close to us with the evident intention of
boarding did our chief give the order to fire.  The effect was to make
them sheer off, but only for a moment.  Directly afterwards they
arranged themselves on our starboard bow and quarter, and commenced a
fire with gingalls, matchlocks, and guns of various sorts, sending
missiles of all shapes and sizes on board us.  Our men kept firing away
bravely, but in a short time, so rapid was the fire kept up on us, that
three or four were killed and several wounded.  I was standing near the
brave Dutchman when a dart shot from a gun struck him, and he fell to
the deck.  I ran to raise him up, but he had ceased to breathe.  His
death soon becoming known among the crew, their fire visibly slackened.
The pirates probably perceived this, and with fearful cries came dashing
alongside.  The Javanese are brave fellows, and though they knew that
death awaited them, they drew their swords and daggers and met the enemy
as they sprang upon our deck.  On came the pirates in overwhelming
numbers, their sharp kreeses making fearful havoc among our poor
fellows.  I saw that all was lost.  I was still unwounded.  Rather than
fall alive into the hands of the pirates, as with the survivors of the
crew I was driven across the deck, I determined to leap overboard, and
endeavour to swim to land.  That was not a moment for considering the
distance or the dangers to be encountered.  Death was certain if I
remained in the ship.  Unnoticed by the enemy, I threw myself overboard,
and struck out in the direction, as I believed, of the shore.  I was a
good swimmer, but light as were my clothes, I was not aware of the
impediment they would prove to me.  Already I was beginning to grow
tired, and to feel that I could not reach the shore.  Yet life was
sweet, very sweet, in prospect I prayed for strength, and resolved to
struggle on as long as I could move an arm.  I threw myself on my back
to float.  I could see the brig, at no great distance, surrounded by the
prahus.  All sounds of strife had ceased.  Only the confused murmurs of
many tongues moving at once reached my ears.  Now that I had ceased for
a few minutes to exert myself, two fearful ideas occurred to me: one,
that I might be swimming from the land, the other, that at any moment a
shark might seize me and carry me to the depths below.  Had I allowed my
mind to dwell on these ideas, I should speedily have lost courage, but
instead I had recourse to the only means by which, under similar trials
and dangers, a man can hope to be supported.  I turned my thoughts
upwards, and prayed earnestly for protection and deliverance.

I was striking out gently with my feet to keep myself moving through the
water when my head struck something floating on the surface.  I turned
round, and found that it was one of the long bamboo buoys employed by
the native fishermen on the coast to mark where their nets, or fish
traps, are placed.  They are very long and buoyant, and capable of
supporting more than one man with ease.  I threw my arms over the one I
had found, and was grateful that I had thus found an object by means of
which my life might possibly be preserved.

I looked round me; the prahus and brig were still to be seen, but after
watching them for some time, they appeared to be drifting away with the
faint land breeze from the spot where I lay.  Thus was the danger of
being seen by them at daylight lessened.  Hitherto I had feared, among
other things, should I be unable to swim on shore, that when the pirates
discovered me in the morning they would send a boat and give me a
quieting knock on the head.  Still my position was a very dreadful one.
Any moment a passing shark might seize hold of me; that I escaped was
owing, I think, humanly speaking, to my having on dark clothes, and my
having kept constantly splashing with my legs.  I was afraid of resting,
also, lest I should lose consciousness, and, letting go my hold of the
bamboo, be swept away by the tide.

At length, when my legs became weary of moving about, I thought that I
would try the effect of my voice in keeping the sharks at a distance.  I
first ascertained that the pirate prahus had drifted to such a distance
that I was not likely to be heard by them, then I began shouting away at
the top of my voice.

What was my surprise, as soon as I stopped, to hear an answer!  For a
moment I fancied that it must be some mockery of my imagination; then
again I heard the voice say, "What, Braithwaite! is that you?"

It must be, I knew, my friend Van Deck who spoke, yet the voice sounded
hollow and strange, very unlike his.

I can scarcely describe the relief I felt at discovering, in the first
place that my friend had escaped, and then on finding that a civilised
human being was near me.  I could not tell whether he knew that his
brother was killed.  I did not allude to the subject.  We did our best
to encourage each other.  We would gladly have got nearer together to
talk with more ease, but were afraid of letting go our hold of the
support, frail though it seemed, to which we clung.  Van Deck encouraged
me by the assurance that it would soon be daylight, and that at early
dawn the fishermen would come off to examine the nets.

"They bear the Dutch, I am sorry to say, no good will," he observed.
"We are accused too justly of laying the produce of their industry under
tribute; but they will respect you as an Englishman, and for your sake
save the lives of both of us.  Till I found that you had escaped I was
very anxious on that score."

As I have said, we talked continually, for silence was painful, as I
could not tell when my companion's voice was silent whether he had been
drawn down suddenly by a shark, or had sunk overcome by fatigue.  Even
with conversation kept up in this way the time passed very slowly by.
How much worse off I should have been alone!  At length Van Deck
exclaimed that he saw the dawn breaking in the sky.  Rapidly after this
objects became more and more distinct; the tall bamboo buoys, with their
tufts of dry grass at the top, floating on the glassy water; then I
could distinguish my companion's head and shoulders just above the
surface; and the land about two miles off, on which, however, a surf
broke which would have made landing difficult, if not dangerous.  The
tall trees and the mountains, range above range, seemed to rise directly
out of it.

Soon the fishermen's voices, as they pulled out, singing in chorus,
towards their buoys, greeted our ears.  Two boats came close to us.  The
fishermen exhibited much surprise at finding us, but instead of at once
coming up and taking us on board, they lay on their oars, and appeared
to be consulting what they should do with the strangers.  How the
discussion might have terminated seemed doubtful, had not Van Deck told
them that I was an Englishman, whose countrymen had just conquered the
island; that he was my friend; and that if any harm happened to us my
people would come and cut off all the people in the district, whereas if
we were well treated they would be munificently rewarded.  This address,
which, taken in its oriental meaning, was literally true, had the
desired effect; one of the boats approached me.  Immediately that I was
in the boat I fainted, and I believe that my friend was much in the same
condition.  He, however, quickly recovered, and by the promise of an
increased reward induced the fishermen to return at once to the shore.
I did not return to consciousness till I found myself being lifted out
of the boat and placed on a litter of wicker-work.  Van Deck was carried
in the same way, as he was too weak to walk.  We were thus conveyed to
the house of a chief, who resided not far from the shore, built on the
summit of a rising ground overlooking the sea.

The chief, who was every inch a gentleman, received us with the greatest
hospitality, and, seeing what we most required, had us both put into
clean, comfortable beds in a large airy room, where, after we had taken
a few cups of hot coffee, we fell asleep, and did not awake again till
the evening.  Our host had then a sumptuous repast ready for us, of
which by that time we were pretty well capable of partaking.  Poor Van
Deck was naturally very much out of spirits at the loss of his brother,
but the necessity of interpreting for me kept him from dwelling on his
own grief.

At the time of which I have hitherto been speaking, when I was in the
east, the spot on which Singapore, with its streets of stone palaces,
its superb public edifices and rich warehouses, now stands, was a sandy
flat, with a few straggling huts inhabited by fishermen or pirates.  I
am about to give a piece of history posterior to my voyage as a
supercargo.  After the peace of 1814, when Java and its dependencies
were given up to the Dutch, their first act was to impose restrictions
on British commerce in the Archipelago.  They were enabled to effect
this object from the position of their settlements, those in the Straits
of Malacca and Sunda commanding all the western entrances to the China
and Java seas, and it therefore became evident that, without some effort
to destroy their monopolies, the sale of British manufactures in the
eastern islands would soon cease.  Sir Stamford Raffles, who was at that
time Governor of Bencoolen, represented the case so strongly to the
Supreme Government at Bengal that the governor-general gave him the
permission he asked to make a settlement near the north-east entrance of
the Straits of Malacca.  He accordingly, in the year 1819, fixed on
Singapore, which stands on the south side of an island, about sixty
miles in circumference, separated by a narrow strait from the Malay
peninsula.  Of course the establishment was opposed by the Dutch, who so
strenuously remonstrated with the British Government that the latter
declined having anything to do with it, and threw the whole
responsibility on Sir Stamford Raffles.  It was not until it had been
established for three years--in the last of which the trade was already
estimated at several millions of dollars--that Singapore was recognised
by Great Britain.

After a rest of a couple of days, poor Van Deck and I were sufficiently
recovered to commence our journey back to Batavia.  He was anxious to be
there that he might take charge of his late brother's affairs--I, that I
might report the loss of the brig, and make fresh arrangements for
securing a cargo for Sydney.  We met with no adventures worthy of note
on our journey.

On our return to Batavia much sympathy was excited for my friend Van
Deck among the merchants at the loss of his brother, and the naval
commander-in-chief, returning soon after from Sourabaya, dispatched two
frigates and a brig of war in search of the pirates.  They were supposed
to belong to some place on the coast of Borneo, which has for many years
abounded with nests of these desperadoes.  The fleet in question was
supposed to belong to a famous chief, the very idol of his followers on
account of the success of his expeditions.  His title was the Rajah
Raga, and he was brother to the Sultan Coti, a potentate of Borneo.  The
Raja Raga had subsequently some wonderful escapes, for he probably got
due notice that an English squadron was looking after him, and took good
care to keep out of their way.  He was afterwards cruising with three
large prahus, when he fell in with an English sloop-of-war, which he was
compelled to engage.  Two of his prahus, by placing themselves between
him and the enemy, held her in check a sufficient time to enable him to
escape, and were themselves then sent to the bottom; indeed, they must
have expected no other fate.

On another occasion the rajah remained on shore, but sent his own prahu,
which carried upwards of a hundred and fifty men and several large guns,
on a cruise, under the command of his favourite panglima, or captain.
Falling in after some time with a brig merchantman, as he supposed, and
wishing to distinguish himself by her capture, he fired into her, and
made preparations to board.  Great was his dismay when he saw a line of
ports open in the side of his expected prize, and he found himself under
the guns of a British man-of-war.  The panglima hailed, and with many
apologies tried to make it appear that he had acted under a
misapprehension, but his subterfuge was of no avail; a broadside from
the man-of-war sent his vessel at once to the bottom, and he and all his
crew perished, with the exception of two or three who, clinging to a
piece of the wreck, were picked up by a native craft, and carried an
account of the disaster to their chief.

Piracy had been the bane of these seas for years.

We were fortunate in obtaining the full amount of the goods we required
without having to wait much longer at Batavia.  There is an old proverb,
"It is an ill wind that blows no one good."  The vessel for which they
were intended had lost her master and both mates by sickness, and the
merchant therefore sold them to me.  We had not altogether escaped, and
several of our men who were perfectly healthy when we entered the
harbour fell victims to the fever engendered by the pestiferous climate.
We were compelled to fill up their places with others, who afterwards
gave us much trouble.

It was with sincere regret I parted from my friend Van Deck.  I was
glad, however, to find that he was likely to obtain employment suited to
his talents under the English Government.  The most direct course for
New South Wales would have been through Torres Straits, but the east
trade wind still blowing, compelled us to take the longer route round
the south of New Holland, and through Bass's Straits, not many years
before discovered, between that vast island and the smaller one of Van
Diemen's Land.  A northerly breeze at length coming on, enabled us to
sight the south-west point of New Holland, and thence we sailed along
the coast, occasionally seeing tall columns of smoke ascending from the
wood, showing the presence of natives.

On approaching Bass's Straits, the captain was one day expressing his
regret to me that we had not time to anchor off one of the islands in it
to catch seals, great numbers of which animals frequented the place in
those days.  He had known, he remarked, considerable sums made in that
way in a very short time.  Our conversation, it appeared, was overheard
by one of the men we had shipped at Batavia.  We had had a good deal of
insubordination among the crew since we left that place, and we traced
it all to that man, Miles Badham, as he called himself.  He was about
thirty, very plausible and insinuating in his manner, a regular
sea-lawyer, a character very dangerous on board ship, and greatly
disliked by most captains.  He had managed to gain a considerable
influence over the crew, especially the younger portion.  His appearance
was in his favour, and in spite of the qualities I have mentioned, I
would not have supposed him capable of the acts of atrocity which were
with good reason laid to his charge.  Ben Stubbs, the second mate, had
charge of the deck one night, and, unable to sleep, I was taking a turn
with him, when Mr Gwynne, the surgeon, came up to us.

"There is something wrong going on among the people below," he
whispered.  "I cannot make out what it is exactly, but if we do not look
out we may possibly all have our throats cut before morning."

"You must have been dreaming, Gwynne," answered Stubbs; "there isn't a
man in the ship would dare do such a thing."

"I am not certain of that," I observed; "at all events, let us be on the
right side.  Forewarned, forearmed.  We will let the captain know, and I
trust that we may thus defeat the plot, whatever it is."



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

HOME AGAIN!

I went down into the captain's cabin, and, awakening him, told him what
the surgeon had said.

"Mutiny!" he exclaimed, as he dressed himself with the usual rapidity of
a seaman.  "We will soon settle that matter."  He stuck his pistols into
a belt he put on for the purpose, and took a cutlass in his hand.
"Here, Braithwaite, arm yourself," he said.  "Tell the officers to do so
likewise.  We will soon see which of the two, that sea-lawyer or I, is
to command the _Barbara_."

Telling Gwynne and Toby to guard the arm-chest, and Randolph to rally
round him the most trustworthy men on deck, he desired Stubbs and me to
follow him forward.  Without a word of warning he suddenly appeared
among the men, who were supposed to be in their berths asleep.  Going
directly up to the berth Badham occupied, he seized hold of him and
dragged him on deck, with a pistol pointed at his head, exclaiming at
the same time, "Shoot any one who offers to interfere!"

The captain was very confident that he had the ringleader, and that the
rest would not move without him.  "Now!" he exclaimed, when he had got
him on the quarterdeck.  "Confess who are your accomplices, and what you
intended to do!  Remember, no falsehood!  I shall cross-question the
others.  If you are obstinate, overboard you go."

Badham, surprised by the sudden seizure, and confused, was completely
cowed.  In an abject tone he whined out, "Spare my life, sir, and I will
tell you all."

"Out with it then!" answered the captain.  "We have no time to spare."

"Well, sir, then I will tell you all.  We didn't intend to injure any
one, that we didn't, believe me, sir; but some of us didn't want to go
back to Sydney, so we agreed that we would just wreck the ship, and as
there are plenty of seals to be got hereabouts, go sealing on our own
account, and sell the oil and skins to the ships passing through the
straits, and, when we should get tired of the work, go home in one of
them."

"And so, for the sake of gaining a few hundred dollars for yourself, you
deliberately planned the destruction of this fine ship, and very likely
of all on board.  Now, understand, you will be put in irons, and if I
find the slightest attempt among the crew to rescue you, up you go to
the yard-arm, and the leader of the party will keep you company on the
other."

Badham, in his whining tone, acknowledged that he understood clearly
what the captain said, and hoped never again to offend.  On this he was
led by two of the mates to one of the after store-rooms, where he could
be under their sight, when irons were put on him, and he was left to his
meditations, the door being locked on him.  The next morning the crew
went about their work as usual, Badham's dupes or accomplices being
easily distinguished by their downcast, cowed looks, and by the unusual
promptness with which they obeyed all orders.  The officers and I
continued to wear our pistols and side-arms as a precautionary measure,
though we might safely have dispensed with them.

A short time before this, in 1802, a settlement had been formed in Van
Diemen's Land, and lately Hobart Town, the capital, had been commenced.
It was, however, a convict station, and no ships were allowed to land
cargoes there except those which came from England direct with stores or
were sent from Sydney,--in consequence of which restriction the
colonists were several times nearly on the point of starvation.

The heads of Port Jackson at length hove in sight, and we entered that
magnificent harbour, the entrance of which Cook saw and named.  Wanting
in his usual sagacity, he took it for a small boat harbour, and passed
by without further exploring it.  Having first brought up in Neutral
Bay, that we might be reported to the governor, we proceeded some miles
up to Sydney Cove, where we anchored in excellent holding ground about
half-pistol-shot from the shore.  Sydney had already begun to assume the
appearance of a town of some consideration, and contained fully 5,000
inhabitants, though still called the camp by some of the old settlers.
It is divided into two parts by a river which runs into the cove, and
affords it unrivalled advantages of water communication.  Several
settlements in the country had already been established, among the chief
of which were Paramatta and Hawkesbury.  The latter settlement was about
six miles long, and about forty miles from Sydney; vessels of two
hundred tons could ascend by the river up it a distance of at least
forty miles.  The town, such as it then was, covered about a mile of
ground from one end to the other, and already gave promise of becoming a
place of considerable extent.  A wise and active governor,
Lieutenant-Colonel Lachlan Macquarie, had ruled the settlement for about
a year, during which period it had made rapid progress.  The previous
governor was the notorious Captain Bligh, whose tyrannical conduct when
in command of the _Bounty_ produced the disastrous mutiny which took
place on board that ship.  The same style of conduct when governor of
New South Wales, especially in his treatment of Mr John McArthur, the
father, as he was called, of the settlement, induced the colonists to
depose him.  The officers and men of the New South Wales corps marched
up to the Government House, and, after hunting for him for some time,
found him concealed under a bed.  His person and property were, however,
carefully protected, and he was shortly afterwards put on board the
_Porpoise_ sloop-of-war, and sent off to England.  The settlement,
however, quickly recovered from the mismanagement of this unhappy man,
and was at the time of my visit in a flourishing condition.

I was fortunate in disposing of the larger part of the cargo under my
charge at good prices.  Hassall and I agreed, however, that more might
be done for our owners, and we proposed, therefore, visiting some of the
islands in the Pacific, and either returning home the way we had come,
or continuing on round Cape Horn.  We had not been long in harbour
before O'Carroll made his appearance on board.  He had brought the ship
of which he had taken charge in safety into harbour, when the emigrants
presented him with so handsome a testimonial that he resolved to settle
in the colony and lay it out to advantage.  The governor had made him a
grant of a large extent of farm land, and assigned him some twenty
convict servants, land in those days being given away to free settlers,
and labour of the nature I have described found them gratis.

"Altogether I am in a fair way of some day becoming a rich man," he
observed, "the which I should never have been had I continued ploughing
the salt ocean.  Besides," he added, with a twinkle in his eye, "how do
I know, if I did, that I should not some day fall into the clutches of
that fearful little monster La Roche? and if I did, I know that he would
not spare me.  Do you know that even to this day I cannot altogether get
over my old feelings, and often congratulate myself as I ride through
the bush that I am far out of his reach."

O'Carroll kept to his resolution, and became a very successful and
wealthy settler.  I frequently received letters from him after my return
home.  In one of them he told me that he had had a surprise.  The
governor asked him one day, as he could speak French, whether he would
like to have some French convicts assigned to him.  He had no objection,
as he thought that he could manage them easily.  What was his
astonishment, when the party arrived at the farm, to recognise among
them, in a little wizened-looking old man, his once dreaded enemy La
Roche!  He determined to try and melt the man's stony heart by kindness.
At first he was almost hopeless in the matter, but he succeeded at
last.  La Roche confessed that he had placed himself within the power of
the British laws in consequence of a visit he paid to England after the
war, for the purpose of carrying out a speculation which ended
unfortunately.  It was satisfactory to hear that he lived to become a
changed man, truly repenting of his misspent life, and thankful that he
had been spared to repent.

I have not spoken of the would-be mutineer, Badham.  It must be
remembered that he had committed no overt act of mutiny, and though
Captain Hassall was perfectly right in putting him in irons, he could
not have been brought to trial on shore.  The day before we reached
Sydney he pleaded so hard to be forgiven, and so vehemently promised
amendment in all respects, that the captain resolved to give him a
trial.  It must be confessed that he was not altogether disinterested in
this, as it would have been impossible to get fresh hands at Sydney, the
temptation to settle in the country having by that time become very
great, so that it was with difficulty we could keep several of our
people who had come from England.

Once more we were at sea.  We touched at Norfolk Island, to which
convicts from New South Wales were sent.  It seemed a pity that so
fertile a spot, so perfect a little paradise, should be given up for
such a purpose.  We obtained here a supply of vegetables and pork, which
were not to be got at that time at any price at Sydney.  After a rapid
voyage from this lovely little island we anchored in Matavai Bay, in the
island of Otaheite.  It was at an interesting time of the history of the
island and its king, Otoo, who since the death of his father had taken
the name of Pomarre.  For many years the band of zealous missionaries
who had come out in the ship _Duff_ had laboured on among the people,
but though they taught the king, the young prince Otoo, and some of
their people, to read and write, they confessed that they had not made
one satisfactory convert.  In 1808 the greater number of the
missionaries retired from Otaheite to the island of Huahine, and the
following year all the married ones left that island for New South
Wales, in consequence of the wars in which the king was constantly
engaged, the destruction of all their property, the risk they ran of
losing their lives, and the seeming hopelessness of introducing
Christianity among such a people.  After an absence of between two and
three years, several of them, having wished to make a fresh attempt to
carry out the work, sailed from Sydney for Tahiti, but stopped at the
neighbouring island of Kimeo, where the king was residing, as Tahiti was
still in a state of rebellion.  They taught the people as before, and
now some began to listen to them gladly.  They still seemed to have
considered the king as a hopeless heathen; but misfortune had humbled
him, he felt his own nothingness and sinfulness, and the utter inability
of the faith of his fathers to give him relief.  After the missionaries
had lived in the island about a year, the king came to them and offered
himself as a candidate for baptism, declaring that it was his fixed
determination to worship Jehovah, the true God, and expressing his
desire to be further instructed in the principles of religion.  The king
proved his sincerity, and ever after remained a true and earnest
Christian.  He still resided at Kimeo, but a considerable number of
people in Tahiti had by this time been converted, and the old heathen
gods were falling into disrepute.

So devastating had been the character of the late wars in Tahiti, that
we found it impossible to obtain supplies, and we therefore sailed for
Ulitea, the largest of the Georgian group, where we were informed that
we should probably be more successful.  No sooner had we dropped anchor
within the coral bed which surrounds the island than the king and queen
came off to pay us a visit.  They were very polite, but not
disinterested, as their object was to collect as many gifts as we were
disposed to bestow.  This island was the chief seat of the idolatry of
the Society Islands.  It was looked upon as a sacred isle by the
inhabitants of the other islands of the group, and more idols existed
and more human sacrifices were offered up there than in all the others.
We were so completely deceived by the plausible manners of the king and
queen and those who accompanied them, that the captain and I, the
surgeon, and two of the mates, went on shore to visit them in return,
accompanied by several of the crew, leaving the ship in charge of Mr
Randolph, the first mate.  We fortunately carried our arms, though
deeming it an unnecessary measure of precaution.  The king had an
entertainment ready for us, and afterwards we were allowed to roam about
the island wherever we pleased.  I observed the people at length
pressing round us, and not liking their looks, advised Captain Hassall
to order our men to keep together, and to be prepared for an attack.
Whether or not they saw that we were suspicious of them we could not
tell, but from this time their conduct changed, and they would only
allow us to proceed in the direction they chose.  At length, however, we
got down to the landing-place.  As we approached the boats we saw a band
of armed natives making for them.  We rushed down to the beach, and
reaching the boats just before they did, we jumped in and shoved off.
These savages, though savage as ever, were also more formidable enemies
than formerly, as many of them had firearms, and all had sharp daggers
or swords.

On reaching the ship we found that Badham and his associates had, soon
after we left, seized a boat, and, in spite of all Mr Randolph could
say or do, had taken all their clothes and other property with them, and
gone on shore.  Although by this conduct Badham showed that he could no
longer be trusted, and therefore that we were well rid of him, it was
important that we should get back the other men, and we agreed to go on
shore the next morning to recover them.  Accordingly, the chief mate and
I went on shore as we proposed, with eight well-armed men, and demanded
an interview with the king.  He did not come himself, but sent his prime
minister, who agreed, for six hatchets and a piece of cloth, to deliver
them up.  We waited for some hours, but the deserters were not
forthcoming, and at last the minister and another chief appeared, and
declared that as the men were likely to fight for their liberty, it
would be necessary that we should lend them our arms.

"Very likely, indeed, gentlemen," answered Mr Randolph, at once
detecting the palpable trick to get us into their power.

"I say, Braithwaite, what say you to seizing these fellows and carrying
them on board as hostages?  It could easily be done."

"Cook lost his life in making a similar attempt, and we might lose
ours," I answered.  "I would rather lose the men than run any such
risk."

In vain we endeavoured by diplomacy to recover the men, and at last we
returned on board, the minister losing the hatchets and piece of cloth.
A feeling of anxiety prevented me from turning in, and I walked the deck
for some time with Benjie Stubbs, the officer of the watch.  At length I
went below and threw myself on my bed, all standing, as sailors say when
they keep their clothes on.  I had scarcely dropped asleep when I was
awoke by hearing Stubbs order the lead to be hove.  I was on deck in a
moment, followed by the captain and the other officers.

"We are on shore to a certainty," exclaimed Stubbs, in an agitated tone.

"Impossible!" observed the captain, "the anchors are holding."

"We'll haul in on the cables and see, sir," answered Stubbs, calling
some of the crew to his assistance.  The cables immediately came on
board.  They had been cut through.  Still there was a perceptible motion
of the ship towards the shore.  Another anchor with an iron stock was
immediately cleared away, but some time was lost in stocking it, and
before it could be let go we felt the ship strike against a coral reef
with considerable force.  Happily there was no wind, or she would
speedily have gone to pieces.  At last we carried the anchors out, and
hauled her off but not without unusual difficulty.  Suddenly the captain
jumped into a boat and pulled round the ship.

"I thought so!" he exclaimed; "the villains have fastened a rope to her
rudder, and were towing us on the rocks."  He cut the rope as he spoke,
and with comparative ease we got the ship out of her perilous position.
Still she was so near the high cliffs which almost surrounded us that we
might be seriously annoyed, not only by musketry but by stones and
darts.  It was evident, also, that should a breeze set in from the sea,
the single anchor would not hold, and that we must be driven back again
on the coral rocks.

We were not left long in doubt as to the intention of the savages and
the deserters, their instigators.  Suddenly fearful shouts burst from
the cliffs above us, and we were assailed by a fire of musketry and by
darts and stones hurled on our deck.  To return it would have been
useless, for we could not see our enemies.  Meantime we kept the men
under cover as much as possible, and got another anchor stocked and
ready to carry out ahead.  The savages must have seen the boat, for as
soon as she was clear of the ship they opened fire on her, and it was
not without difficulty that the anchor was carried out to the required
distance, and the crew of the boat hurriedly returned on board.

Owing to Badham's machinations, some of the crew had at first been
disaffected, but a common danger now united them, as they saw full well
the treatment they might expect should the savages get possession of the
ship.  Besides the ship's guns we had four swivels, thirty muskets, and
several blunderbusses and braces of pistols.  These were all loaded and
placed ready for use, with a number of boarding-pikes, for we thought
that at any moment the savages would come off in their canoes and
attempt to board us.  The whole night long they kept us on the alert,
howling and shrieking in the most fearful manner.  Soon after day broke
their numbers increased, and as they could now take aim with their
firearms our danger became greater.  Fortunately they were very bad
marksmen, or they would have picked us all off.  Strange as it may seem,
no one was hit, though our rigging and boats received much damage.
After the crew had breakfasted we sent two boats out ahead to tow off
the ship, but the bullets and other missiles flew so thickly about them
that they returned, the men declaring that the work was too dangerous.
However, Benjie Stubbs, jumping into one of the boats, persuaded them to
go again, while we opened a fire from the deck of the ship.  As soon as
the savages saw us ready to fire, they dodged behind the rocks, so that
none of them were wounded.  Still we hoped that by this means the boats
would be allowed to tow ahead without molestation.  We were mistaken,
for the savages shifted their ground, and once more drove the boats on
board.  We clearly distinguished Badham and the rest of the deserters
among the savages, and several times they were seen to fire at us.
Happily they also were wretched shots, and their muskets thoroughly bad
also.  That they should venture to fire showed that they had no doubt of
getting us into their power, for should we escape and inform against
them, they would run a great chance of being captured and hanged.  Later
in the day, Jack and I again made attempts to tow out the ship from her
perilous position.

The savages all the day continued howling and shrieking and working
themselves into what seemed an ungovernable fury, while they were,
however, biding their time, knowing that probably a strong sea-breeze
would soon spring up and cast the ship helpless into their power.  Thus
another night closed on us.  Ere long great was our joy to feel a light
air blowing off the shore.  The pawls of the windlass were muffled, and
not a word was spoken.  The anchors were lifted, the topsails were
suddenly let drop, and slowly we glided off from the land.  The weather
becoming very thick and dark, we were compelled again to anchor, lest we
might have run on one of the many reefs surrounding the island.  Here we
remained on our guard till daylight, when we could see the natives
dancing and gesticulating with rage at finding that we had escaped them.
The favourable breeze continuing, we were soon able to get far out of
their reach, I for one deeply thankful that we had not only escaped
without loss ourselves, but without killing any of the unhappy savages.
The treatment we received was such as at that time might have been
expected from the inhabitants of nearly all the islands of the Pacific,
including those of New Zealand, and numberless were the instances of
ships' companies and boats' crews cut off by them.

A very few years after our visit, this same island was brought under
missionary influence, the idols were overthrown, heathenism and all its
abominable practices disappeared, and the inhabitants became a
thoroughly well-ordered, God-fearing, and law-obeying Christian
community.  The same account may be given of the larger number of the
islands which stud the wide Pacific, and ships may now sail from north
to south, and east to west, without the slightest danger from the
inhabitants of by far the greater portion of them.

But it is time that I should bring my narrative to a conclusion.  This
adventure at Ulitea was amongst my last.  Finding that our trading
expedition to the Pacific Islands was not likely to prove of advantage
to our owners, Captain Hassall and I resolved to proceed home at once
round Cape Horn.

We happily accomplished our voyage without accident and without any
further occurrence worthy of note.  Our path was no longer beset by
hostile cruisers, for there was a lull in the affairs of Europe.  After
the many excitements of the past few months, the days seemed long and
tedious as I had never known them before; and it was with a sense of
relief, as well as of real pleasure, that I again saw in the early
morning light the shores of old England looming clear in the distance.
I need not dwell on all the happy circumstances of my return, or on the
special satisfaction with which I looked again on one familiar face.
Suffice it to say that I had the gratification of receiving the
commendation of my kind friend Mr Janrin for the way in which I had
carried out his instructions and performed my duties as Supercargo; and
that this voyage prepared the way for more substantial proofs of his
favour.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of James Braithwaite, the Supercargo, by 
W.H.G. Kingston

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JAMES BRAITHWAITE, THE SUPERCARGO ***

***** This file should be named 21386.txt or 21386.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/3/8/21386/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
