The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Black Tor, by George Manville Fenn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Black Tor
       A Tale of the Reign of James the First

Author: George Manville Fenn

Illustrator: W. S. Stacey

Release Date: May 4, 2007 [EBook #21298]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLACK TOR ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England





The Black Tor, by George Manville Fenn,
A Tale of the Reign of James the First.

_______________________________________________________________________

As always with this author there is plenty of action in this book.  Two
teenage boys of about the same age come from families which have been
in intense rivalry for centuries.  Each of them lives in a castle set
among the wild and desolate hills of Derbyshire, an almost mountainous
area in the Midlands of England, known generally as the Peak District.

The boys know each other but as enemies.  Yet events occur which draw
them together as allies, but they dare not call themselves friends.  A
roguish band of ex-soldiers have arrived in the district, and set up
camp out on the moors, from whence they descend to steal from, rob and
loot the houses of the poorer folk.

The boys privately form an alliance using the men working on their
fathers' land as a private army, to attack and rid the land of these
desperadoes.  Their first attack results in dreadful failure.  But then
they revise their ideas of what they can use for weaponry, and are
finally successful.

Yet another excellent book from the prolific pen of this great author.
NH
_______________________________________________________________________

THE BLACK TOR, BY GEORGE MANVILLE FENN,
A TALE OF THE REIGN OF JAMES THE FIRST.



CHAPTER ONE.

ONE CAPTAIN PURLROSE.

About as rugged, fierce-looking a gang of men as a lad could set eyes
on, as they struggled up the steep cliff road leading to the castle,
which frowned at the summit, where the flashing waters of the Gleame
swept round three sides of its foot, half hidden by the beeches and
birches, which overhung the limpid stream.  The late spring was at its
brightest and best, but there had been no rain; and as the men who had
waded the river lower down, climbed the steep cliff road, they kicked up
the white limestone dust, and caked their wet high boots, which, in
several instances, had opened holes in which toes could be seen, looking
like curious reptiles deep in gnarled and crumpled shells.

"Beggars!  What a gang!" said Ralph Darley, a dark, swarthy lad of
perhaps seventeen, but looking older, from having an appearance of
something downy beginning to come up that spring about his chin, and a
couple of streaks, like eyebrows out of place, upon his upper lip.  He
was well dressed, in the fashion of Solomon King James's day; and he
wore a sword, as he sat half up the rugged slope, on a huge block of
limestone, which had fallen perhaps a hundred years before, from the
cliff above, and was mossy now, and half hidden by the ivy which covered
its side.

"Beggars," he said again; "and what a savage looking lot."

As they came on, it began to dawn upon him that they could not be
beggars, for if so, they would have been the most truculent-looking
party that ever asked for the contributions of the charitable.  One, who
seemed to be their leader, was a fierce, grizzled, red-nosed fellow,
wearing a rusty morion, in which, for want of a feather, a tuft of
heather was stuck; he wore a long cloak, as rusty-looking as his helmet;
and that he carried a sword was plain enough, for the well-worn scabbard
had found a very convenient hole in the cloak, through which it had
thrust itself in the most obtrusive manner, and looked like a tail with
a vicious sting, for the cap of the leathern scabbard had been lost, and
about three inches of steel blade and point were visible.

Ralph Darley was quick at observation, and took in quickly the fact that
all the men were armed, and looked shabbier than their leader, though
not so stout; for he was rubicund and portly, where he ought not to have
been, for activity, though in a barrel a tubby space does indicate
strength.  Neither were the noses of the other men so red as their
leader's, albeit they were a villainous-looking lot.

"Not beggars, but soldiers," thought Ralph; "and they've been in the
wars."

He was quite right, but he did not stop to think that there had been no
wars for some years.  Still, as aforesaid, he was right, but the war the
party had been in was with poverty.

"What in the world do they want in this out-of-the-way place--on the
road to nowhere?" thought Ralph.  "If they're not beggars, they have
lost their way."

He pushed back the hilt of his sword, and drew up one leg, covered with
its high, buff-leather boot, beneath him, holding it as he waited for
the party to come slowly up; and as they did, they halted where he sat,
at the side of the road, and the leader, puffing and panting, took off
his rusty morion with his left hand, and wiped his pink, bald head,
covered with drops of perspiration, with his right, as he rolled his
eyes at the lad.

"Hallo, young springald!" he cried, in a blustering manner.  "Why don't
you jump up and salute your officer?"

"Because I can't see him," cried the lad sharply.

"What?  And you carry a toasting-iron, like a rat's tail, by your side.
Here, who made this cursed road, where it ought to have been a ladder?"

"I don't know," said Ralph angrily.  "Who are you?  What do you want?
This road does not lead anywhere."

"That's a lie, my young cock-a-hoop; if it did not lead somewhere, it
would not have been made."

The man's companions burst into a hoarse fit of laughter, and the boy
flushed angrily.

"Well," he said haughtily, "it leads up to Cliff Castle, and no
farther."

"That's far enough for us, my game chicken.  Is that heap of blocks of
stone on the top there the castle?"

"Yes!  What do you want?"

The man looked the lad up and down, rolled one of his eyes, which looked
something like that of a lobster, and then winked the lid over the
inflated orb, and said:

"Gentlemen on an ambassage don't read their despatches to every
springald they see by the roadside.  Here, jump up, and show us the way,
and I'll ask Sir Morton Darley to give you a stoup of wine for your
trouble, or milk and water."

"You ask Sir Morton to give you wine!" cried the lad angrily.  "Why, who
are you, to dare such a thing?"

"What!" roared the man.  "Dare?  Who talks to Captain Purlrose, his
Highness's trusted soldier, about dare?" and he put on a tremendously
fierce look, blew out his cheeks, drew his brows over his eyes, and
slapped his sword-hilt heavily, as if to keep it in its sheath, for fear
it should leap out and kill the lad, adding, directly after, in a hoarse
whisper: "Lie still, good sword, lie still."

All this theatrical display was evidently meant to awe the lad, but
instead of doing so, it made him angry, for he flushed up, and said
quickly:

"I dare," and the men laughed.

"You dare!" cried the leader; "and pray, who may you be, my bully boy?"

"I don't tell my name to every ragged fellow I meet in the road," said
the boy haughtily.

"What!" roared the man, clapping his hand upon the hilt of his blade, an
action imitated by his followers.

"Keep your sword in its scabbard," said Ralph, without wincing in the
least.  "If you have business with my father, this way."

He sprang to his feet now, and gazed fiercely at the stranger.

"What?" cried the man, in a voice full of exuberant friendliness, which
made the lad shrink in disgust, "you the son of Sir Morton Darley?"

"Yes: what of it?"

"The son of my beloved old companion-in-arms?  Boy, let me embrace
thee."

To Ralph's horror, the man took a step forward, and would have thrown
his arms about his neck; but by a quick movement the lad stepped back,
and the men laughed to see their leader grasp the wind.

"Don't do that," said Ralph sternly.  "Do you mean to say that you want
to speak to my father?"

"Speak to him?  Yes, to fly to the hand of him whom I many a time saved
from death.  And so you are the son of Morton Darley?  And a
brave-looking, manly fellow too.  Why, I might have known.  Eye, nose,
curled-up lip.  Yes: all there.  You are his very reflection, that I
ought to have seen in the looking-glass of memory.  Excuse this weak
moisture of the eyes, boy.  The sight of my old friend's son brings up
the happy companionship of the past.  Time flies fast, my brave lad.
Your father and I were hand and glove then.  Never separate.  We fought
together, bled together, and ah! how fate is partial in the way she
spreads her favours!  Your father dresses his son in velvet; while I,
poor soldier of fortune--I mean misfortune--am growing rusty; sword,
morion, breast-plate, body battered, and face scarred by time."

"Aren't we going to have something to eat and drink, captain?" growled
one of the men, with an ugly scowl.

"Ay, brave boys, and soon," cried the leader.

"Then, leave off preaching, captain, till we've got our legs under a
table."

"Ah, yes.  Poor boys, they are footsore and weary with the walk across
your hilly moors.  Excuse this emotion, young sir, and lead me to my old
brother's side."

There was something comic in the boy's look of perplexity and disgust,
as, after a few moments' hesitation, he began to lead the way toward the
half castle, half manor-house, which crowned the great limestone cliff.

"Surely," he thought, "my father cannot wish to see such a ragamuffin as
this, with his coarse, bloated features, and disgraceful rags and dirt."

But the next minute his thoughts took a different turn.

"If what the man says be true, father will be only too glad to help an
old brother-officer in misfortune, and be sorry to see him in such a
plight."

With the frank generosity of youth, then, he softened his manner toward
his companion, as they slowly climbed upward, the great beeches which
grew out of the huge cracks and faults of the cliff shading them from
the sun.

"So this is the way?" cried the man.

"Yes: the castle is up there," and Ralph pointed.

"What! in ruins?" cried the captain.

"Ruins?  No!" cried Ralph.  "Those stones are natural; the top of the
cliff.  Our place is behind them.  They do look like ruins, though."

"Hah!  But what an eagle's nest.  No wonder I find an eaglet on my way."

Ralph winced, for the man clapped a dirty hand upon his shoulder, and
gripped him fast, turning the lad into a walking-staff to help him on
his road.

"Have you come far this morning?" said Ralph, to conceal his disgust.

"Ay, miles and miles, over stones and streams, and in and out among
mines and holes.  We were benighted, too, up yonder on the mountain."

"Hill," said Ralph; "we have no mountains here."

"Hills when you're fresh, lad; mountains when you're footsore and weary.
But we stumbled upon a niche, in a bit of a slope near the top, and
turned out the bats and foxes, and slept there."

"Where?" cried Ralph quickly.  "Was there a little stream running
there--warm water?"

"To be sure there was.  Hard stones, and warm water: those were our bed
and beverage last night."

"I know the place.  Darch Scarr."

"Fine scar, too, lad.  Been better if it had been healed up, with a door
to keep out the cold wind.  Oh! so this is where my old comrade lives,"
he added, as he came in sight of an arched gateway, with embattled top
and turrets, while through the entry, a tree-shaded courtyard could be
seen.  "And a right good dwelling too.  Come on, brave boys.  Here's
rest and breakfast at last."

"And I hope you'll go directly after," thought Ralph, as he led the way
into the courtyard, and paused at a second entrance, at the top of a
flight of stone steps, well commanded by loopholes on either side.  Then
aloud:

"Will you wait here a minute, while I go and tell my father?"

"Yes: tell him his old brother-officer is here."

"I did not catch your name when you spoke before," said Ralph.  "Captain
Pearl Ross?"

"Nay, nay, boy; Purlrose.  He'll know directly you speak.  Tell him, I'm
waiting to grasp him by the hand."

Ralph nodded, and sprang up the stone flight, while the visitor's
companions threw themselves down upon the steps to rest, their leader
remaining standing, and placing himself by the mounting stone on one
side, hand upon sword-hilt, and arranging his ragged cloak in folds with
as much care as if it had been of newest velvet.



CHAPTER TWO.

SIR MORTON RECEIVES HIS GUEST.

"Father can't be pleased," thought the lad, as he hurried in through a
heavy oaken door, strengthened by the twisted and scrolled iron bands of
the huge hinges, and studded with great-headed nails.  This yielded
heavily, as, seizing a ring which moved a lever, he raised the heavy
latch, and for a moment, as he passed through, he hesitated about
closing the door again upon the group below.  But as he glanced at the
party, he hesitated no longer.  Their appearance begat no confidence,
and the great latch clicked directly.

The next minute, he was hurrying along a dark stone passage, to spring
up a few more stairs, leading into a corridor with a polished oaken
floor, and mullioned windows looking down upon the courtyard; and as he
reached the second, a bright, handsome girl, whose features proclaimed
sisterhood, started out to meet him.

"Oh Ralph," she said, "who are those dreadful-looking men you have
brought up?"

"Don't stop me, Min," he said hastily.  "Old soldiers who want to see
father.  Where is he?"

"In his room."

The lad hurried on, and entered through a door way on his left, to
where, in an oaken-panelled room, a stern, slightly grey,
military-looking man sat poring over an old book, but looked up directly
the lad entered.

"Ah, Ralph, boy," he said; "been out?"

"Only on the cliff, father," cried the lad hastily.  "Visitors."

"Visitors?  Nonsense!  I expect no visitors.  Who are they?"

"Captain Purlrose and his men."

"Purlrose!" cried Sir Morton, with a look of angry disgust.  "Here?"

"Yes, father," said Ralph, watching keenly the impression made by his
words.  "Waiting at the foot of the steps."

"Bah!  I thought the drunken, bullying scoundrel was dead and gone years
ago.  Hung or shot, for he deserved either."

"Hah!" ejaculated the lad, with a sigh of relief.  "Then you are not
glad to see him, father?"

"Glad to see him?  Are you mad, boy?"

"No, father," said the lad, with a merry laugh.  "I hope not; but he
said you would be, and that you were old brothers-in-arms, and that he
longed to grip you by the hand; and he tried to hug me, and shed tears,
and flattered me, and said all sorts of things."

"Pah! the same as of old; but you said--and his men."

"Yes, about a dozen like him; ruffianly-looking, rag-bags of fellows,
all armed, and looking like a gang of bullies and robbers."

Sir Morton frowned, rose from his seat, and walked to the side of the
room, where his sword and belt lay in front of a bookcase.

"Well, I suppose I must see the fellow.  He served under me, years ago,
Ralph, and I suppose he has come begging, unless he sees a chance to
steal."

"Then I was not unjust, father, in thinking ill of the man and disliking
him."

"Unjust?  Pah!  The fellow was a disgrace to the name of soldier; and
now, I suppose, that there is no war on the way, he has been discharged
from the king's service, with a pack of his companions."

"He said he had saved your life, father."

Sir Morton laughed contemptuously.  "I have no recollection of the fact,
Ralph, boy, and I don't think I should have forgotten so important a
matter; but I do recollect saving his, by interceding when he was about
to be shot for plundering some helpless people.  There; let him and a
couple of his men come in.  The poor wretch is in a bad state, I
suppose, and I will give him something to help him on his road."

Ralph went to the door, but turned back, hesitating.

"Well, my boy?" said his father.

"Had I not better tell some of the men to arm, and be ready?" asked the
lad.

"What!  Nonsense, boy!  I know my man.  He would not dare to be
insolent."

"But he has a dangerous-looking gang of fellows with him."

"Of the same kind as himself, Ralph.  Have no fear of that.  If there
were real danger, we could soon summon a dozen stout men to deal with
him and his party.  But, as I said, let him only bring in two or three
with him."

Ralph hurried out, and found the captain and his men forming a
picturesque group about the stone steps; and as soon as he appeared, the
former swung himself round, and threw his cloak over his shoulder, with
a swaggering gesture.

"Hallo, my young eagle," he cried.  "What saith the parent bird, the
gallant lord of the castle?"

"My father will see you, sir," replied Ralph.  "This way."

"Aha!  I knew he would," cried the man, giving his steel cap a cock over
on one side, and displaying a large pink patch of his bald head.  "Come
on, brave boys."

"Stop!" cried Ralph quickly.  "Three of you, only, are to accompany your
leader."

"Eh?  What?" cried the captain fiercely, as a low murmur arose.

"That is what my father said, sir."

"What does this mean?" cried the man theatrically.  "Separate me from my
brave companions-in-arms?  Does this mean treachery, young sir?"

"Treachery?  Why should it mean that?" cried Ralph stoutly, as the man's
words endorsed the character so lately given of him.  "If," argued Ralph
to himself, "the fellow were the honest, brave soldier, why should he
fear treachery from the brother-officer with whom he said he had often
shared danger?"

"The world is full of wickedness, boy," replied the captain; "and I have
often been misjudged.  But there; a brave man never knows fear.  You
three come with me, and if in half an hour I do not come back, boys, you
know what to do."

There was a shout at this, and hands struck sword-hilts with a loud
clang.

"Right, brave boys, and don't leave one stone upon another until you
have found your captain."

Ralph burst out into a fit of laughter, and then felt annoyed with
himself, as the man turned round scowling.

"What do you mean by that, boy?"

"That your men would have their work cut out, sir," said Ralph sharply.
"This way, please."

The captain uttered a low growl, signed to three of his men, and the
party followed the lad, who, to his annoyance, once more came across his
sister, hurrying along the passage.

"Salute, brave boys, salute," cried the captain.  "Youth and beauty in
front--the worship of the gallant soldiers of the king."

He struck an attitude, which was roughly imitated by the men.

"A sister, on my life," cried the captain.

"This way," said Ralph shortly, and with the colour coming into his
cheeks, as he felt indignant with the man for daring to notice his
sister, and angry with her for being there.

The door of Sir Morton's room was thrown open, and the captain strode
in, followed by his men; and, as he saw the knight, standing with his
back to the fireplace, he struck a fresh attitude.

"Ah! at last!" he cried.  "My old brave companion-in-arms!  Well met,
once more."

He stretched out his hands, and swaggered forward to grasp Sir Morton's.

"Halt!" cried that gentleman sharply, without stirring from his
position.  "Now, Captain Purlrose, what is your business with me?"

"Business with you?  Is this my reception, after long years of absence?
Ah, I see!  The war-worn soldier forgotten once again.  Ah, Sir Morton
Darley, why humble me before my gallant men?"

"I have not forgotten you, Captain Purlrose.  I remember you perfectly,
and you are not changed in the least.  Now, if you please, be brief, and
explain your business."

"My business!  I thought I was coming to an old friend and brother."

"No, sir; you thought nothing of the kind.  Come, you know I understand
you thoroughly.  State your business, if you please."

The three men laughed aloud, and Sir Morton, who had not before noticed
them, turned upon them sharply, with the result that the laughter died
out, and they looked uncomfortable.

"And this before my men!  Humbled thus!  Have I fallen so low?"

"You are wasting words, Captain Purlrose; and, as you have found where I
lived, and have evidently journeyed long, tell me at once why you have
come."

"I will," cried the captain, resuming his swaggering air.  "I, as an old
soldier, sir, came to ask favours of no man."

"Then why have you come, sir, if not to ask a favour?"

"I was passing this way, and, as an old brother-in-arms lived here, I
thought I would call."

"You were not passing this way, sir; no brother-in-arms lived here, but
an officer, under whom you once served; and you had some object in view
to make you cross our desolate moors," said Sir Morton, sternly.  "If
you want help, speak out."

"I am no beggar, Sir Morton Darley," said the man, in blustering tones.

"I am glad to hear it.  Now, then, what is it?"

"Well, sir, you boast of knowing me thoroughly.  Let me tell you that I
know you, and your position here."

"And find it is in every respect a strong one, sir.  Well?"

"You live here, close at hand to an enemy who covets your lands, and
with whom you have fought again and again.  You and your ancestors were
always enemies with the Edens."

"Quite right, sir.  Well, what is that to you?"

"This, Sir Morton Darley.  The war is over.  I and my brave fellows are
idle, our swords rusting in their sheaths."

"More shame to the brave fellows who do not keep their weapons bright.
Well, this is a long preamble to tell me that you have all been
dismissed from the king's service.  Go on."

The captain stared and scowled, but he could not fully meet the
searching eyes which looked him down.

"Well," he said, rather blunderingly now, "knowing what I did of my old
officer's state--"

"`Old officer' is better, Captain Purlrose.  Go on, sir."

"I said, here am I, a brave soldier, with a handful of stout followers,
eager to do good, honest work; why should I not go and offer my sword to
Sir Morton Darley?  He is sorely pressed."

"Wrong," said Sir Morton.

"He would be glad of our help," continued the man, without heeding the
interruption; "we could garrison his castle and help him to drive his
enemy from the field.  Twelve of them, all well-tried soldiers, who can
make him king of the country round.  That, sir, is why I have come, to
confer a favour more than ask one.  Now, sir, what do you say?  Such a
chance for you may never occur again."

"Hah!" ejaculated Sir Morton; "and all this out of pure good
fellowship!"

"Of course; save that a retainer who risks his life in his chief's
service is worthy of his hire."

"Naturally, sir.  So that is your meaning--your object in coming?"

"That is it, Sir Morton.  We can put your castle in a state of defence,
make raids, and harass the enemy, fetch in stores from the surrounding
country, and make you a great man.  Think of how you can humble the
Edens."

Sir Morton frowned as he looked back at the past, and then from thence
up to his present position, one in which he felt that he played a humble
part in presence of his stronger enemy; and Ralph watched him, read in
his face that he was about to accept his visitor's proposal, and with a
feeling of horror at the thought of such a gang being hired to occupy a
part of the castle, and brought, as it were, into a kind of intimacy, he
turned quickly to his father, laid his hand upon his arm, and whispered
eagerly:

"Father, pray, pray don't do this.  They are a terribly villainous set
of ruffians."

The captain twitched his big ears in his efforts to catch what was said;
but he could only hear enough to make out that the son was opposing the
plans, and he scowled fiercely at the lad.

"Wait, wait," said Sir Morton.

"But do go out and look at the rest of the men, father," whispered
Ralph.

"There is no need."

"Then you will not agree, father?"

"Most certainly not, my boy."

Purlrose could not catch all this, but he scowled again.

"Look here, young cockerel," he cried, "don't you try and set my old
officer against me."

"No need," said Sir Morton hotly.

"Ah, that's because hard times have made me and my poor gallant fellows
look a little shabby."

"Not that, sir.  Your old character stands in your way."

"Oh, this is hard--this is hard.  You rich, and with everything
comfortable, while I am poor, and unrewarded for all my labour and risk
by an ungrateful Scot."

"Don't insult your sovereign, sir!" cried Sir Morton.

"Oh, this is hard--this is hard."

"Look here, Michael Purlrose, if you had been an officer and a gentleman
in distress, I would have helped you."

"Do you mean to say that I am not an officer, and a gentleman in
distress, sir?" cried the captain, clapping his hand to the hilt of his
sword, a movement imitated by Ralph, angrily.  But Sir Morton stood
back, unmoved.

"Let your sword alone, boy," he said sternly.  "You, Michael Purlrose,
knowing you as I do of old, for a mouthing, cowardly bully, do you think
that I am going to be frightened by your swagger?  Yes, I tell you that
you are no gentleman."

"Oh, this is too much," cried the visitor.  "It is enough to make me
call in my men."

"Indeed!" said Sir Morton coolly.  "Why call them in to hear me
recapitulate your disgrace?  As to your appeals to me for help, and your
claim, which you profess to have upon me, let me remind you that you
were engaged as a soldier of fortune, and well paid for your services,
though you and yours disgraced the royal army by your robberies and
outrages.  All you gained you wasted in riot and drunkenness, and now
that you are suffering for your follies, you come and make claims upon
me."

"Oh, this is too hard upon a poor soldier who has bled in his country's
service.  Did I not once save your life, when you were at your last
gasp?"

"No, sir; it was the other way on.  I saved yours, and when I was
surrounded, and would have been glad of your help, you ran away."

"Ha-ha-ha!" cried Ralph, bursting into a roar of laughter.

"Ah-h-ah!" cried the captain fiercely, as he half drew his sword; but he
drove it back with a loud clang into its sheath directly.  "Stay there,
brave blade, my only true and trusted friend.  He is the son of my old
companion-in-arms, and I cannot draw upon a boy."

Ralph laughed aloud again, and the captain scowled, and rolled his eyes
fiercely; but he did not startle the lad in the least, and after a long,
fierce stare, the man turned to Sir Morton.

"Don't be hard upon an old brother-soldier, Morton Darley," he said.

"No, I will not," said Sir Morton quietly.  "You and your men can
refresh yourselves in the hall, and when you start on your way, I will
give you a pound or two to help you."

"Oh, as if I were a common wayside beggar.  Comrade, this is too hard.
Can you not see that my beard is getting grizzled and grey?"

"Yes; but I do not see what that has to do with it."

"Think again, old comrade.  Twelve brave and true men have I with me.
Take us as your gentlemen and men at arms to protect you and yours
against those who are unfriendly.  You must have enemies."

Sir Morton started and glanced at his son, for these words touched a
spring in his breast.  With thirteen fighting men to increase his little
force, what might he not do?  The Edens' stronghold, with its regularly
coming-in wealth, must fall before him; and, once in possession, Sir
Edward Eden might petition and complain; but possession was nine points
of the law, and the king had enough to do without sending a force into
their wild out-of-the-way part of the world to interfere.  Once he had
hold of the Black Tor, he could laugh at the law, and see the old enemy
of his house completely humbled.

Sir Morton hesitated and turned his head, to find his son watching him
keenly, while Captain Purlrose stood with his left hand resting on the
hilt of his sword, making the scabbard cock out behind, and lift up the
back of his ragged cloak, as with his right he twisted up and pointed
one side of his rusty-grey fierce moustache.

The man was watching Sir Morton keenly, and his big ears twitched, as he
tried to catch the whispered words which passed between father and son.

"What do you say, Ralph, lad?  With the help of these men I could easily
make Eden bite the dust.  Then the Black Tor would be mine, and
afterwards yours; with all the rich revenue to be drawn from the
lead-mine.  It is very tempting, boy."

"Yes, father," said the boy hotly, and his face flushed as he spoke;
"but that's what it is--a miserable temptation.  We'll humble the Edens,
and have the Black Tor and the lead-mine; but we'll win all with our
swords like gentlemen, or fail.  We could not go and take the place with
a set of ruffians like those outside, and helped by such a man as yonder
bully.  You couldn't do it, father.  Say no."

"Hah!  More insults," cried Purlrose, who had caught a word here and
there.  "But no; lie still, good sword: he is a beardless boy, and the
son of the brave comrade I always honoured, whate'er my faults."

Ralph turned upon him angrily; but his father laid a hand upon the boy's
shoulder, and pressed it hard.

"Right, Ralph, lad," he said warmly, and he looked proudly in the boy's
eyes.  "I could not do it in that way."

"Hah!" ejaculated the lad, with a sigh of content.

"No, Purlrose," continued Sir Morton.  "I shall not avail myself of your
services.  Go into the hall and refresh yourself and your men.  Come to
me afterward, and I will help you as I said."

"With a mouthful of bread, and a few pence, and after all this weary
journey across these wild moors.  But I see: it is all through the words
of this beardless boy.  Suppose I tell you that, now I have come, I mean
to stay?" he added threateningly.

"Shall I get the men together, father?" said Ralph quickly.

"No, boy, there is no need," said Sir Morton firmly.  "I am not afraid
of Michael Purlrose's threats."

"What!" cried the man.  "You do not know me yet."

"Better than you know yourself, sir," said Sir Morton, rising.  "That is
the way to the hall.  Have the goodness to go first."

The captain threw his cloak back over his right shoulder, slapped his
right hand heavily upon his rusty breast-plate, and then, with a
flourish, caught at the hilt of his sword, and again half drew it from
its sheath, to stand scowling at Ralph, the intentness of his gaze
seeming to affect his eyes, so that they began to lean towards each
other, as if for help, till his look became a villainous squint.  Then,
as neither father nor son quailed before him, he uttered a loud "Hah!"
thrust back his sword, and strode with a series of stamps to the door,
his high, buff-leather boots rustling and creaking the while.

There he faced round.

"I give you one more chance, Morton Darley," he cried.  "Yes or no?"

"No," said Sir Morton firmly.

"One moment before it is too late.  Are we to be friends or foes?"

"Neither," shouted Ralph quickly.

"Yes, boy, one or the other.  You, Morton Darley, will you take me into
your service, or do you drive me into going straight to your rival and
enemy, who will jump at my offer, and pay me better than I could expect
of you?"

"Go where you please, sir," said Sir Morton.

"Ah, you drive me to it, when I would have been your friend.  There, it
must be so; but don't blame me when you are humbled in the dust."

"Why, if you go there," cried Ralph, "Sir Edward Eden will make his men
disarm your crew of ragged Jacks, and set you all to work in his mine."

"What!  Never.  Now, Darley, once more--friends or foes?"

"Neither, I tell you, man.  Now leave my place at once, you and yours.
I will neither help you nor have any further dealings with you.  Go."

"What!" roared Purlrose; and this time he drew his sword fully, and
Ralph's bright blade followed suit, glittering, while the captain's
looked rusty and dull.

"Pooh! put up your sword, Ralph," said Sir Morton, advancing toward
their visitor, who began to shrink back.  "Sheathe your blade, sir," he
said sternly, and without paying the least attention to the man's
bullying looks, he threw open the door, and pointed to the entrance.

He passed out, giving the door behind him a heavy slam, and marched out
to the group standing about the broad steps and road, where father and
son could hear him haranguing his men, who immediately burst into an
angry yell, and for the most part turned menacingly toward the house.



CHAPTER THREE.

ABOUT THE ENEMY.

"Shall I fasten the door, father?" cried Ralph excitedly.

"No," said Sir Morton firmly.  "I know my man of old."

Ralph looked on and listened, as a low growl arose; but, bully and
coward or no, it was evident that Captain Purlrose was master of his
men, who stood listening and nodding their heads, one or two slapping
the hilts of their swords menacingly, and at last the leader of the
ragged crew turned and shook his fist threateningly at the house, and
ended by striding jauntily away through the embattled gateway, followed
by his gang.

"Will they come back, father, at night?" said Ralph, after uttering a
sigh of relief.

"No, my boy; I judge the men by their leader.  Michael Purlrose always
had a wholesome love of keeping his skin sound; his men have, without
doubt, the same.  He will execute his threat, though, of going to
Eden's."

"And if Sir Edward takes them into his service, it will be awkward for
us, father."

"Yes, _if_, my boy; but I do not think that Eden will.  We shall hear no
more of the vagabonds, unless Purlrose comes back to beg."

"I'll go and watch them, father," cried Ralph eagerly.

"Yes; but you will not go near, so as to run any risk?  If they found
you alone, they would attack and strip you of everything of value you
have."

"I'll take care," cried the lad.  "I can get up to the side of the
cliff, and watch them right away.  I can see the path to the Black Tor
from there."

"Yes; go," said Sir Morton, and the boy hurried out, crossed the little
court, and passing through a small side-door, reached the slope of the
cliff upon which the old castle was built, and then by a narrow pathway,
clambered a couple of hundred feet higher, starting the jackdaws from
their resting-places, making them fly off, uttering angry cries of
_tah_! _tah_!  Then throwing himself down behind a great block of
limestone, which had fallen from above, and which looked as if a thrust
would send it hurtling down some hundred feet, into the river below, he
waited till, as he fully expected, he saw the party of men appear down
below in the track; and then he followed their course, seeing them
disappear behind the trees, appear again, and after making divers short
cuts, as if their leader were well acquainted with the place, make off
for the ford.  Then he watched them as they straggled across the river,
and struck into the narrow cliff path which led to the great dark-hued
cliff known as the Black Tor, where the Edens' impregnable stronghold
stood, perched upon a narrow ledge of rock which rose up like a
monstrous tongue from the earth, connected on one side by a narrow
natural bridge with the main cliff, the castellated building being
protected on all sides by a huge rift fully a couple of hundred feet
deep, the tongue being merely a portion of the cliff split away during
some convulsion of nature; or perhaps gradually separated by subsidence,
the top affording sufficient space for the building, and its courtyards.

Ralph watched the men until the last had disappeared; and then, knowing
from the configuration of the place as he had seen it from another point
of view, that he would probably not see them again for an hour or two,
perhaps not again that day, if Sir Edward Eden received the proposals of
Captain Purlrose favourably, he began slowly and thoughtfully to
descend.  For he knew that it would be a serious matter for his father
if Sir Edward Eden seized upon the opportunity for strengthening his
retainers and attacking his rival.

The feud between the two families had lasted for generations, beginning
so far back that the origin was lost in the mists of time.  All that
Ralph Darley knew was, that in the days of Henry the Eighth, an Eden had
done a Darley deadly injury that could never be forgiven, and ever since
the wrong had been handed down from father to son as a kind of
unpleasant faith by which it was the duty of all Darleys to be prepared
to exterminate all Edens; and if they could not exterminate them and
seize upon their possessions, to do them all the injury they could.

There was another version of the story, as Ralph well knew, and it was
precisely the same, saving for the following exception: that in the
beginning it was a Darley who did the deadly wrong to an Eden.  But one
thing was certain--the two families had carried on their petty warfare
in the most determined way.  Edens had fallen by the sword; so had
Darleys.  There was a grim legend, too, of an Eden having been taken
prisoner, and starved to death in one of the dungeons of Cliffe Castle,
in Queen Mary's time; and Ralph had often gone down below to look at the
place, and the staple ring and chain in the gloomy place, shuddering at
the horror of the prisoner's fate.

For this the Edens had waited their time, and surprised the castle one
night, driving the occupants from place to place, till they took refuge
in the central tower, from which they could not be dislodged; so the
Edens contented themselves by the following reprisal: they set fire to
the castle in a dozen places before they retired, the flames raging till
there was no more woodwork to destroy, and nothing was left but the
strong central tower and the sturdy walls.  The place was restored,
though, soon after, and the Sir Ralph Darley of Elizabeth's time made an
expedition one night to give tit-for-tat, but only to find out that it
was impossible to get across the stoutly-defended natural bridge at
Black Tor, and that it was waste of time to keep on shooting arrows,
bearing burning rags soaked in pitch, on to the roofs of the towers and
in at the loopholes.  So he retreated, with a very sore head, caused by
a stone thrown from above, dinting in his helmet, and with half his men
carrying the other half, wounded or dead.

His successor had tried again and again to master the Edens and seize
their possessions.  Amongst these was the Black Tor lead-mine,
approached by steps in the side of the cliff; its galleries honeycombed
the place, running right under the earth, and into natural caverns of
the large opposite cliffs of limestone, where the jackdaws built their
nests.

Ralph Darley, living as he did that day in the days of King James,
pondered on all those old legends as he descended to give his father the
information he had acquired; and as he stepped down, he knit his brows
and began to think that it was quite time this feud had an end, and that
it must be his duty to finish it all off, in spite of the addition to
the strength at Black Tor, by waiting his opportunity, and meeting, and
in fair fight slaying, young Mark Eden, who was about his own age,
seventeen, and just back home from one of the great grammar-schools.
This done, he would make a scheme for seizing the Black Tor, putting Sir
Edward Eden and his mercenaries to the sword, but sparing the men who
were miners, so that they might go on working for the Darleys.  By this
means he would end the feud, secure peace, and make his father a rich
and happy man, having proved himself a thoroughly good and chivalrous
son.

Ralph felt very brave, and proud, and happy, when he had reached this
point, which was just as he opened the door of his father's room, which
contained a very small library--books being rare and precious in those
days--plenty of handsome armour and war-like weapons of offence, and a
corner set apart for alchemy and the study of minerals; for, in a
desultory way, Sir Morton Darley, bitten by the desire to have a mine of
his own to produce him as good an income as that of his enemy neighbour,
had been given to searching without success for a good lode of lead.

Sir Morton was reading an old tome as his son entered the room, hot,
eager, and excited.

"Well, boy," he said, looking up dreamily; "what is it?"

"They've gone straight to Black Tor, father."

"The Edens?  Have they?  I did not know they had been away."

"No, no, father; that captain fellow and his men."

"Oh, of course.  I had almost forgotten them.  Tut, tut, tut!  It will
be very awkward for us, Ralph, if Sir Edward listens to that scoundrel's
proposals.  But there, it cannot be helped.  There never was an Eden yet
who was a gentlemen, and all we have to do is to be well prepared.  The
old tower is stronger than ever, and if they come we'll fight them from
the outer gate to the wall, from the wall to the inner wall, and if they
drive us from that, there is the tower, where we can set them at
defiance."

"As old Sir Ralph did, father," cried the boy, flushing with pride.

"Exactly, my boy; and I do not feel much fear of Captain Purlrose and
his men."

"No, father; I suppose he will keep on half-drawing his sword, and
thrusting it back with a clang."

"Exactly, Ralph, boy," cried Sir Morton, laughing.  "Just that one act
shows the man's character to a T.  Bluster, and then retreat.  But
suppose it should come to fighting, my boy.  Hadn't you better go back
to school, and stay till the trouble's over?"

"What!" cried Ralph fiercely.

"You surely don't want to fight, boy?"

"No, father, I don't want to fight; but if you are obliged to--Oh,
father, you will not send me away?"

Sir Morton looked searchingly at the flushed countenance before him for
some moments before speaking.

"If you wish to stay, Ralph, certainly I shall not send you away.  I
only gave you the opportunity to go if you wished.  However, perhaps we
shall hear no more of the matter.  Eden may not listen to that
scoundrel.  If he does, we may set to work and furbish up our arms, lay
in stores of provisions, and be prepared for our defence."

"Then I hope he will engage the men, father," cried Ralph.

"Eh?  And pray why, boy?" exclaimed Sir Morton.

"Because, father," said the lad, speaking in a deeply-moved tone of
voice, his eyes flashing and his cheeks flushed.  "You have done nothing
lately to show how deeply you resent all the old wrongs; and if the
Edens hire these men, it will be a good opportunity for fighting our old
foes, beating them and taking possession, and ending the feud."

"Yes," said Sir Morton, smiling, "a good opportunity, boy; but we might
lose the day."

"We will not lose the day, father," cried the lad hotly.  "Those men who
fight for pay are cowards at heart, and they will lead the Edens to
their destruction."

"But suppose that, after all, the Darleys were the ones to blame?"

"Oh, father, we can't stop to think of that.  We do know that they have
committed outrage after outrage against our family, and you have always
taught me that it was our duty to punish the Edens."

"Yes, my boy, I have, as my father and my grandfather taught me; but I
have often wished the wretched business were at an end.  I want to be at
peace."

"And you shall be, father, and soon, too, now," cried Ralph excitedly.
"But you will begin at once?"

"What, making peace?"

"No, father, war," cried the lad eagerly.

"Yes," said Sir Morton sternly, "if the Edens do."

"Oh, father, how calmly you take it all.  I should have thought you
would be ready to begin at once."

"Yes, Ralph, because you are young, and have never seen what even the
pettiest war means, not even the bright side, with its chivalry and
panoply, and gay show.  I have seen that, and the other side too."

"But you would fight, father?" cried the lad, looking astonished.

"Yes," said Sir Morton, with his face turning hard and stern, "if the
need arises, boy, and to the death."



CHAPTER FOUR.

MARK EDEN HAS A MORNING'S WALK.

Eden, fresh from Linkeham, on account of a terrible attack of fever
ravaging the school to such an extent that it was considered wise to
close it for a time, was enjoying the pleasant change, and wondering how
long it would be before the school would reopen, and whether his father,
Sir Edward Eden of Black Tor, would send him back.

"I ought to be old enough now to give up a schoolboy's life," he said to
himself, "and begin thinking of what I shall be as a man."

He said this to himself as he descended the stone steps which led to the
platform at the side of the precipice, where a natural Gothic arch hung
over the entrance to the mine, which began with a steep slope running
down through the limestone for fifty yards, and then opened out into an
extensive cavity, whose roof was a hundred feet overhead, and in whose
floor the square hole had been cut to follow the great vein of lead,
which spread like the roots of some gigantic tree in various directions.
The great hole represented the trunk of the tree, and this had once
been solid lead ore, but all had been laboriously cut away, as well as
many of the branches, which represented the roots, though plenty were
left to excavate, and fresh ones and new cavities were constantly being
formed, so that the Eden mine at Black Tor was looked upon as the
richest in the county.

Mark Eden stopped to have a chat with some of his father's men, who were
going and coming from the square trunk-hole, and he watched them
ascending and descending the greasy ladders fixed against the side, each
man bearing a candle, stuck in his leather cap.

"I shan't want to be a miner," he said, as he gazed down at the tiny
sparks of light below.  "Faugh! how dark and dismal it looks.  A dirty
hole.  But father says dirty work brings clean money, and it's just as
well to be rich, I suppose.  But what a life!  Might just as well be a
mole."

He began to hum over an old English ditty, and his voice echoed
strangely from above.

"Let's see: Mary wants some of that blue spar, and I promised to get a
lot.  Must go down one of these days with Dummy Rugg: he says he knows
of some fine bits.  Not to-day, though."

He hurried out into the bright sunshine again, went up the steps to the
castle, which stood perched at the top of a huge mass of rock,
surrounded on all sides by the deep gorge, and then crossed the natural
bridge to the main cliff, of which the foundation of the castle was the
vast slice, split away, most probably by some volcanic disturbance.
Masses of lava and scoria uncovered by the miners, from time to time,
showed that volcanic action had been rife there at one period;
additional suggestion that the said action had not yet died out, being
afforded by the springs of beautifully clear warm water, which bubbled
out in several places in the district.

As the lad crossed the bridge, thinking nothing of the giddy, profound
depths on either side, there being not the slightest protection in the
way of rail to the six-foot wide path, he shook back his brown hair,
thrust his hands in his pockets, and with the sheath of his sword
banging against his legs, started off along the first level place for a
run.

A looker-on would have wondered why he did this, and would have gazed
ahead to see what there was to induce him to make so wild a rush in a
dangerous place.  But he would have seen nothing but rugged path,
tree-top, and the face of the cliff, and would not have grasped the fact
that the reason for the boy's wild dash was, that he was overcharged
with vitality, and that energy which makes a lad exert himself in that
natural spontaneous effort to get rid of some of the vital gas, flashing
along his nerves and bubbling through his veins.

"What a day!" he cried aloud.  "How blue the sky is.  Hallo! there they
go."

He stopped suddenly to watch a cavernous hole in the cliff, from which
half-a-dozen blue rock-pigeons had darted out, and as he watched, others
swooped by, and darted in.

The next minute he went on, followed the path, and turned a
buttress-like corner, which took him to the other side of the great
chine of limestone, which was here quite as precipitous, but clothed
with trees, which softened the asperities of nature, and hung from
shelf, crack, and chasm, to cast shadows down and down, right to where
the river flashed and sparkled in its rapid flow, or formed deep dark
pools, which reflected the face of the cliff in picture after picture.

"One never gets tired of this place," muttered the lad, as he began to
descend a zigzag path, worn in the face of the cliff, starting the
powdered-headed jackdaws from their breeding shelves and holes, and
sending the blackbirds chinking from out of the bushes which clung to
the grey precipice.

"That's where the brown owl's nest was," muttered the lad.  "Bound to
say there's one this year.  S'pose I'm getting too old for
birds'-nesting and climbing.  Don't see why I should be, though."

He reached the river's bank at last, and after walking for a few yards,
trampling down the white blossoms of the broad-leaved garlic, which here
grew in profusion, and suggested salad, he reached a rippling shallow,
stepped down into the river, and waded across, the water only reaching
to his ankles.

As he stepped out on the other side, and kicked and stamped to get rid
of the water, he gazed along the winding dale at as glorious a bit of
English scenery as England can produce; and on that bright May morning,
as he breathed in the sweet almond-like odour of the fully-blown
hawthorn blossom, he muttered: "Linkeham's nice enough, but the lads
would never believe how beautiful it is here.  Hallo! there he goes.  I
wonder where they are building this year."

He shaded his eyes as he looked up at a great blackbird, winging its way
high up above the top of the great cliff which hung over the river, and
watched till it disappeared, when, in a low melodious voice, he began
singing softly another snatch of an old English song, something about
three ravens that sat upon a tree, with a chorus of: "Down, a-down,
a-down," which he repeated again and again, as if it helped him to
reflect.

"Wonder where they are building this year," he said to himself again.
"I should like a couple of little ones to bring up.  Get them young, and
they'd be as tame as tame."

He went on wondering where the ravens, which frequented the
neighbourhood of the river and its mountainous cliffs, built their
nests; but wondering did not help him, and he gave up the riddle, and
began, in his pleasant holiday idleness, to look about at other things
in the unfrequented wilderness through which the river ran.  To trace
the raven by following it home seemed too difficult, but it was easy to
follow a great bumble-bee, which went blundering by, alighting upon a
block of stone, took flight again, and landed upon a slope covered with
moss, entering at last a hole which went sloping down beneath the
stones.

A little farther on, where a hawthorn whitened the bank with its
fragrant wreaths, there was a quick, fluttering rush, a glimpse of a
speckle-breasted thrush, and a little examination showed the neat nest,
plastered inside smoothly with clay, like a cup, to hold four beautiful
blue eggs, finely-spotted at the ends.

"Sitting, and nearly hatched," said the lad.  "Might wait for them, and
bring them up.  I dunno, though.  Sing best in the trees.  Wouldn't hop
about the courtyard and cliffs like the young ravens.  Wonder where they
build?"

He went on, to stop and watch the trout and grayling, which kept darting
away, as he approached the riverside, gleaming through the sunlit water,
and hiding in the depths, or beneath some mass of rock or tree-root on
the other side.

"Rather stupid for me, getting to be a man, to think so much about
birds' nests; but I don't know: perhaps it isn't childish.  Old Rayburn
is always watching for them, and picking flowers, and chipping bits of
stone.  Why, he has books full of pressed grasses and plants; and boxes
full of bits of ore and spar, and stony shells out of the caves and
mines.--Well now, isn't that strange?"

He stopped short, laughing to himself, as he suddenly caught sight of a
droll-looking figure, standing knee-deep in the river, busy with rod and
line, gently throwing a worm-baited hook into the deep black water,
under the projecting rocks at the foot of the cliff.

The figure, cut off, as it were, at the knees, looked particularly short
and stout, humped like a camel, by the creel swung behind to be out of
the way.  His dress was a rusty brown doublet, with puffed-out breeches
beneath, descending half-way down the thigh, and then all was bare.  A
steeple-crowned, broad-brimmed hat, from beneath which hung an abundance
of slightly-curling silvery hair, completed the figure at which Mark
Eden gazed, unseen; for the old man was intent upon his fishing, and
just then he struck, and after a little playing, drew in and unhooked a
finely-spotted trout, which he was about to transfer to his basket, when
he was checked by a greeting from the back.

"Morning, Master Rayburn.  That's a fine one."

"Ah, Mark, boy, how are you?" said the old man, smiling.  "Yes: I've got
his brother in the basket, and I want two more.  Better come and help me
to eat them."

"Can't to-day.--Quite well?"

"Yes, thank God, boy.  Well for an old man.  I heard you were back from
school.  How's that?"

"Bad fever there.  All sent home."

"That's sad.  Ought to be at work, boy.  Better come and read with me."

"Well, I will sometimes, sir."

"Come often, my boy; keep you out of mischief."

"Oh, I shan't get into mischief, sir."

"Of course not; idle boys never do.  Not likely to get fighting, either.
I see young Ralph Darley's at home.  Fine chance for you," said the old
man, with a sarcastic ring in his voice, as he slipped his trout into
the basket.

"Is he?" cried the lad excitedly.

"Oh yes; he's up at the Cliff.  Now then, why don't you fill your
pockets with big stones to throw at him, or cut a big club?  Oh, I see,
though.  You've mounted a skewer.  Pull it out, and try if the point's
sharp.  I suppose you're going down the river to lay wait for him and
kill him."

"There, you're as bad as ever, Master Rayburn," cried the lad, flushing,
and looking mortified.  "Last time I saw you it was just the same:
laughing at, and bantering, and sneering at me.  No wonder my father
gets angry with you, and doesn't ask you to the Tor."

"Yes, no wonder.  Quarrels with me, boy, instead of with himself for
keeping up such a mad quarrel."

"It isn't father's fault, sir," cried the lad quickly.  "It's the old
feud that has been going on for generations."

"Old feud!  Old disgrace!" cried the fisherman, throwing away the worm
he was about to impale on his hook, to see it snapped up at once by a
good fish; and standing his rod in the water, like a staff to lean on,
as he went on talking, with the cold water swirling about over his
knees, and threatening to wet his feather-stuffed breeches.  "I'm
ashamed of your father and Ralph's father.  Call themselves Christian
gentlemen, and because a pair of old idiots of ancestors in the dark
ages quarrelled, and tried to cut one another's throats, they go on as
their fathers did before them, trying to seize each other's properties,
and to make an end of one another, and encouraging their sons to grow up
in the same vile way."

"My father is a gentleman and a knight, sir," cried Mark Eden hotly;
"and I'm sure that he would never turn cut-throat or robber if he was
left alone."

"Of course; and that's what Sir Morton Darley would say, or his son
either; and still the old feud is kept up.  Look here, boy; suppose you
were to run against young Ralph now, what would happen?"

"There'd be a fight," cried the lad, flushing up; and he drew in his
breath with a hiss.

"Of course!" sneered the old man.

"Well, he never sees me without insulting me."

"And you never see him without doing the same."

"But--"

"But!  Bah!  I haven't patience with you all.  Six of one; half a dozen
of the other.  Both your families well off in this world's goods, and
yet miserable, Fathers, two Ahabs, longing for the other's land to make
a garden of herbs; and if they got it, a nice garden of herbs it would
be!  Why, Mark Eden, as I'm a scholar and a gentleman, my income is
fifty pounds a year.  My cottage is my own, and I'm a happier man than
either of your fathers.  Look about you, boy--here, at the great God's
handiwork; wherever your eyes rest, you see beauty.  Look at this
silvery flashing river, the lovely great trees, the beautiful cliffs,
and up yonder in the distance at the soft blues of the mountains,
melting into the bluer skies.  Did you ever see anything more glorious
than this dale?"

"Never," cried the lad enthusiastically.

"Good, boy!  That came from the heart.  That heart's young and soft, and
true, as I know.  Don't let it get crusted over with the hard shell of a
feud.  Life's too great and grand to be wasted over a miserable quarrel,
and in efforts to make others wretched.  And it's so idiotic, Mark, for
you can't hurt other people without hurting yourself more.  Look here,
next time you, spring boy, meet the other spring boy, act at once; don't
wait till you are summer men, or autumn men.  When you get to be a
winter man as I am, it will be too late.  Begin now, while it is early
with you.  Hold out your hand and shake his, and become fast friends.
Teach your fathers what they ought to have done when they were young.
Come, promise me that."

"I can't, sir," said the boy, frowning.  "And if I could, Ralph Darley
would laugh in my face."

"Bah!" ejaculated the old man, stamping the butt of his rod in the
water.  "There, I've done with you both.  You are a pair of young
ravens, sons of the old ravens, who have their nests up on the stony
cliffs, and you'll both grow up to be as bad and bitter as your fathers,
and take to punching out the young lambs' eyes with your beaks.  I've
done with you both."

"No, you haven't, Master Rayburn," said the lad softly.  "I was coming
to see you this evening, to ask you to go with me for a day, hunting for
minerals and those stones you showed me in the old cavern, where the hot
spring is."

"Done with you, quite," said the old man fiercely, as he began to bait
his hook with another worm.

"And I say, Master Rayburn, I want to come and read with you."

"An untoward generation," said the old man.  "There, be off!  I'm
wasting time, and I want my trout, and _thymallus_, my grayling, for man
must eat, and it's very nice to eat trout and grayling, boy.  Be off!
I've quite done with you."  And the old man turned his back, and waded a
few steps upstream.

"I say, Master Rayburn," continued the lad, "when you said `Bah!' in
that sharp way, it was just like the bark of one of the great black
birds."

"What, sir!" snapped the old man; "compare me to a raven?"

"You compared me and my father, and the Darleys, all to ravens, sir."

"Humph!  Yes, so I did," muttered the old fisherman.

"I didn't mean to be rude.  But you reminded me: I saw one of them fly
over just before I met you, sir.  Do you know where they are nesting
this year?"

"Eh?" cried the fisherman, turning sharply, with a look of interest in
his handsome old face.  "Well, not for certain, Mark, but I've seen them
several times lately--mischievous, murderous wretches.  They kill a
great many lambs.  They're somewhere below, near the High Cliffs.  I
shouldn't at all wonder, if you got below there and hid among the
bushes, you'd see where they came.  It's sure to be in the rock face."

"I should like to get the young ones," said the lad.

"Yes, do, my boy; and if you find an addled egg or two, save them for
me.  Bring then on, and we'll blow them."

"I will," said the lad, smiling.--"Don't be hard on me, Master Rayburn."

"Eh?  No, no, my boy; but I can't help being a bit put out sometimes.
Coming down this evening, were you?  Do.  I'll save you a couple of
grayling for supper--if I catch any," he added, with a smile.

"May I come?"

"Of course.  Come early, my boy.  I've a lot of things to show you that
I've found since you were at home, and we'll plan out some reading, eh?
Mustn't go back and get rusty, because you are at home.  We'll read a
great deal, and then you won't have time to think about knocking Ralph
Darley's brains out--if he has any.  You haven't much, or you wouldn't
help to keep up this feud."

"Oh, please don't say any more about that, Master Rayburn."

"Not a word, boy.  Must go on--a beautiful worm morning."

The old man turned his back again.

"Don't be late," he cried; and he waded onward, stooping, and looking
more humped and comical than ever, as he bent forward to throw his bait
into likely places, while Mark Eden went onward down-stream.

"I like old Master Rayburn," he said to himself; "but I wish he wouldn't
be so bitter about the old trouble.  It isn't our fault.  Father would
be only too glad to shake hands and be friends, if the Darleys were only
nice, instead of being such savage beasts."

He went on, forcing his way among the bushes, and clambering over the
great blocks of stone which strewed the sides of the river, and then
stopped suddenly, as he sent up a moor-hen, which flew across the river,
dribbling its long thin toes in the water as it went.

"I wonder," he said thoughtfully, "whether the Darleys think we are
beasts too?"



CHAPTER FIVE.

HOW MARK EDEN FOUND THE RAVEN'S NEST.

"Ah, there he goes," said Mark, beneath his breath, as he stood
motionless, and watched a large raven flapping along, high overhead, in
the direction he was taking.  "Perhaps that's the cock bird.  Looks big.
The nest may be where old Master Rayburn says, or up this way, and the
bird's going for food."

He waited till the raven disappeared, and then went on down-stream,
taking to a path higher up, which led him by a pretty cottage, standing
in a niche at a bend of the river, so that the place had a good view up
and down-stream, and with its pleasant garden, looked the sort of home
which might well make its owner content.

But Mark Eden's mind was too full of ravens' nests, to leave room for
any contemplation of the old scholar's cottage; and he hurried on by the
path, which cut off two or three bends of the river, taking him right
away for quite a couple of miles, and bringing him to the water's-edge
again, just in front of a mighty cliff, which towered up out of a dense
grove of beeches on the other side of the river.

The place was solitary and still in the extreme; and going close down to
the water's-edge, Mark Eden seated himself upon a mossy stone, between
two great hawthorns, which hid him from anything coming up or
down-stream, while brambles, ferns, and clustering hemlock-plants, hid
his back and front.

It was a pleasant resting-place, to sit and watch the rapidly running
river, which was very shallow here; and from his hiding-place, he could
see the shadows of the ripples, and the stony bottom, and also those
cast by trout, as they glided here and there, waiting for the
unfortunate flies and caterpillars which had fallen from overhanging
boughs, to be washed down the stream.

But Mark had but a glance for the fish: his attention was taken up by
the mass of precipitous stone before him, so steep, that it was only
here and there, in cracks or on ledges, that herb or stunted bush could
find a place to root; and as he scanned the precipice, from its foot
among the beeches, to its brow, five hundred feet above where he sat, he
wondered whether the ravens nested there.

No more likely place could be found for the great birds to rear their
young; the cliff looked inaccessible, and days would pass, sometimes
weeks, and not a soul come near.

"Old Master Rayburn must be right," thought the lad.  "What eyes he has
for everything of this kind.  There are no rooks in the beeches; there
isn't a jackdaw about; and I haven't seen a rock-dove; all proof that
the ravens are here, for the others would not dare to nest near them.
Only be to hatch young ones for food.  But I don't see my gentleman nor
his lady."

A hoarse, distant bark was heard, just as the lad's neck began to ache
with staring up in vain, in the search for the nest, and he sat
perfectly motionless, crouched amongst the hemlock and heracleum, to be
rewarded by seeing a shadow thrown on the white limestone far on high,
and directly after one of the great glossy black birds alight, right on
the edge of the cliff, from whence it hopped into the air, and seemed to
let itself fall some forty feet, down behind a stunted patch of broom,
which had rooted in a cleft.  There it disappeared for a few moments, to
reappear, diving down toward the stream, but only to circle upward
again, rise higher and higher, and finally disappear over the cliff,
half a quarter of a mile away.

"Found it!" panted Mark; "a nest with young ones.  Chance if there are
any eggs for Master Rayburn."

He leaned back to examine the place.

"Can't get up there," he muttered at last; "but it would be easy to get
down from the top.  I could do it, but--"

He took off his cap, and gave his brown hair a vicious scratch, for
there were other obstacles in the way.

It would be easy to wade across the river; easy to make his way along
the other side to where the cliff sloped, five hundred yards lower down
the stream.  From there he could reach the high down, which was broken
off short to form the cliff, and walk along the edge till he was exactly
over the nest, and then descend.  Those were not obstacles, but trifles.
The great difficulty was moral.  That great mass of limestone was on
the Darley estate, and for a few minutes, the lad felt as if he must
give it up.

But obstacles only spurred him on to action, and he cried to himself,
petulantly:

"Is it theirs?  Who are they, to claim an open wild place like that?
They'll be saying next that all Darbyshire belongs to them.  It's as
much ours as theirs, and, if we had our rights, it would be ours.  I
shall go, in spite of all the Darleys in the county.  Who are they?
Piece of rock and moor like that, and they claim it.  Let them.  I shall
not stop away for them."

The boy flushed, and ignoring the fact that he was about to commit a
trespass, he slipped off shoes and hose, waded straight across the
shallow river, and sat down on the other side to dry his feet, and put
on hose and shoes again.

And all the time he felt a strong desire to glance up and down the
river, to see if he had been observed by any one; but in his pride of
heart he would not, for fear that he would be seen watching, and some
one connected with his family's enemies take it for a sign of fear.

This done, he rose, gave his feet a stamp, glanced up at the face of the
cliff, to see one of the parent ravens fly off, uttering an angry croak;
and then he began to bear off to the right, so as to ascend the low part
of the cliff, reaching the top quite five hundred yards away, and
turning at once to continue his ascent by walking along the edge, which
rose steeply, till it reached the point above the raven's nest, and then
sloped down into a hollow, to rise once more into the wooded eminence
which was crowned by Cliff Castle, the Darleys' home.

"They've a deal better place than we," said Mark to himself, as he
strode on, in full defiance of the possibility of being seen, though it
was hardly likely, a great patch of mighty beech-trees, mingled with
firs, lying between the top of the big cliff and the Darleys' dwelling.
"More trees, and facing toward the west and south, with the river below
them, while our home is treeless and bare, and looks to the north and
east, and is often covered with snow when their side's sunny and bright.
My word! warm work, climbing up here, and the grass is as slippery as
if it had been polished.  Mustn't go over.  Father wouldn't like it if I
were to be killed; but I shouldn't be, for I should come down in the
tree-tops, and then fall from bough to bough into the river, and it's
deep just under the raven's nest."

Thinking this, he went on, up and up, cautiously, clear of head as one
who had from childhood played about the cliffs, and reaching the summit
breathless, to stand on the extreme verge, watching one of the ravens,
which came sailing up, saw him at a distance, rose above his head, and
then began to circle round, uttering hoarse cries.

"Ah, thief!" cried the lad; "I see what you have in your beak.  A
chicken; but your tricks are at an end.  No more feeding young ravens
here."

"Better get to the nest, first, though," said the boy laughingly; and he
leaned forward, quite out of the perpendicular, to look down below the
bush which sheltered the nest.  "Easy enough: I can do it.  If Ralph
Darley had been half a fellow, he would have taken it himself.  Better
take off my sword, though.  No; mustn't leave that in the enemy's
country.  I'll take it down with me.  Be nice to come up again, and find
that one of those ragged Jacks had got hold of it!  I wonder whether Sir
Morton engaged them the other day.  Very likely.  He's bad enough to do
such an ungentlemanly thing.  What did that fellow call himself.  Pearl
nose?  Ought to have been Ruby nose.  No, no; I remember now; it was
Pearl Rose.  My word, how high and mighty he was!  Quite threatening.
He'd go straight to Sir Morton Darley, if father did not enlist him and
his men in our service.  That upset father, just as he was thinking
whether he should have them.  He never could bear being threatened.  How
soon he sent them about their business, and threatened to summon the
miners as well as our men.  It will be awkward, though, if Sir Morton
has engaged them, and strengthened his followers like that.  May mean an
attack.  I wonder whether he did take their offer.  If he has, father
will wish he had agreed to the fellow's terms.  I don't know, though.
As he said to me, they would have been falling out with the mine men,
and they seemed a ragged, drunken-looking set.  Glad he sent them about
their business."

All this, suggested by the possibility of losing his sword, just when he
was upon an enemy's land; but he had not stopped on the top to think,
for after lying down upon his breast, to gaze down and select the best
place for his descent, he turned as he mused, lowered his legs, and
began to descend, finding that after all his sword was not much in his
way.

It was no new thing to Mark Eden to climb about the limestone cliffs,
which formed one side of the Gleame, sometimes sloping down gradually,
at others perpendicular, and in some cases partly overhanging, though in
the latter case, it meant only for a few winters before, after being
well saturated, the frost split them, piece by piece, till they went
thundering down among the trees, generally to bound right into the river
bed.

But, sloping or perpendicular, the formation was nearly always the same,
stratum after stratum of from one to three feet in thickness, lying one
upon the other, and riven into blocks which looked as if they had been
laid by giant masons, to form a monstrous wall.  Consequently, between
the strata and their upright dividing cracks, there were plenty of
places where a bold climber could find foot and hand-hold, without
counting upon roots of trees, wiry shrubs, and tough herbs, to hold on
by when other objects failed.

So easily enough, down went Mark, humming his tune again, and changing
the humming to singing about the three ravens sitting on a tree, though
in this instance, excepting the young in the nest below, there were only
two, and instead of sitting, they were sailing round and round, croaking
and barking angrily, the cock bird, if it was not the hen, making a
pretence every now and then, to dart down and strike at the would-be
marauder, who was descending to their home.

But Mark lowered himself steadily enough, laughing at the angry birds,
and listening for the first cries of their young, as he wondered how big
they would be.

He soon found that appearances were deceitful, upon a great height like
that, for instead of the bush which hid the nest, being forty feet from
the cliff brow, it was a good sixty, and the climbing was not so good as
he had anticipated.  The limestone crumbled away here and there; tufts
of tough grass came out by the roots, and the stunted stems of bushes
were not plentiful enough for hand-hold.  But whenever the lad found the
place too difficult, he edged off to right or left, and found an easier
spot from which he lowered himself, and edged his way back along the
joining of the next row of blocks.

To any one gazing from the opposite side, his appearance, flattened
against the cliff, would have seemed appalling, but to Mark Eden it was
a mere nothing; he was descending the old cliff, and trying to find the
easiest way, that was all.  No nervous qualms troubled him, and the
thought of falling never once came into his head.

Lower and lower, with the sun beating upon his back, and the ravens
croaking more and more loudly, and getting more threatening.

"Just wait till I get down to the bush, my fine fellows," he said aloud.
"Then you may come on if you like, and I should like to see you do it;
only look out, for it means spitting yourselves.  Glad I brought my
sword."

He was now only about ten feet above the bush; and as he held on for a
few moments and looked down, he saw that there was a good-sized ledge in
front of a cranny, in which the nest must be, and upon this ledge,
bones, bits of wool, feathers, and remains of rabbits' fur, were
scattered, showing how hard the old birds had worked to feed their
young.

He saw, too, something else which completely upset one of his plans,
which was, to continue his descent right to the bottom of the cliff,
after securing the young ravens; for the strata retired for some
distance below the bush, and he grasped at once the fact, that he must
return by the way he descended.

"Wish I had a bag with me," he thought, as he heard a peculiar squeaking
arise from beneath his feet.  "Never mind: I'll tie their legs together
with my handkerchief, or thrust them into toy breast."

_Croak_--_croak_--_craw_--_awk_! came from one of the ravens, as it
swept by him with a rush.

"Wait a minute, my fine fellow, or madam," said the boy.  "Hard for you,
perhaps; but how many chickens and ducklings have you stolen? how many
unfortunate lambs have you blinded this spring?  Can't have ravens here.
Hah! that's it."

For upon forcing his hands well into a fault in the rock, he had lowered
his feet and found good foot-hold on the ledge, lowered himself a little
more, and saw that he could easily sit down, hold on by his left hand,
the stout bush being ready, and draw out a pair of well-grown nestlings
as soon as he liked.

"I'm afraid, Master Rayburn, that if there are eggs I should get them
broken if I put them in my pocket," he said aloud; "and if they do
break, phew!  It would be horrible.  Ah, put them in my cap.  Let's
see."

He thrust his right hand into the niche, and snatched it back, for the
young ravens were big enough to use their beaks fiercely, and set up a
loud, hoarse series of cries, as soon as they found that an enemy was at
the gate.

"You vicious little wretches!" he cried.  "My word, they can bite.  Ah,
would you!"

This was to one of the ravens, which rendered frantic by the cries of
the young, swooped at him, and struck him with a wing in passing.

"Declaration of war, eh!" he said.  "Well, it's your doing, you
murderous creatures, you lamb-slayers.  I did not know you could be so
fierce."

The raven had sailed off to a distance now, croaking loudly, and joined
its mate; and as at the next movement of Mark, seated on his perilous
perch, the young ravens screeched hoarsely again, it was evident that
there was to be a fresh attack, this time united.

But the lad reached down his right arm, got hold of the hilt of his thin
rapier, and pressing closely to the niche, drew the weapon from its
sheath.

"Now then!" he cried, as the blade flashed in the sunshine, "I'm ready
for you.  A new way of killing ravens.  Come on."

He had not long to wait, for finding the entrance to their nesting-place
partly darkened, the young birds set up a loud series of cries,
maddening the old ones, and with a rush, down came one of them, so
fiercely that the lad's arm received a heavy stroke from a powerful
wing, the sword, passing through the feathers, between the bird's wing
and body.

"That's one to you," said the lad, drawing his breath with a sharp hiss.
"My word, you can hit hard!  It's your life or mine, my fine fellow, so
look out."

Almost before he had breathed these words, amidst the outcry made by the
young, the second raven stooped at him, just as a falcon would at a
heron, and it came so unexpectedly, that once more the point of the
sword was ill directed, and a severe buffet of the bird's wing nearly
sent him down.

"This is getting too serious," he said, pressing his teeth together, as
he for the first time fully realised what enormous power a bird has in
its breast muscles.

They gave him no time for thinking, the first bird which had attacked,
after taking a swift curve round and upward, coming down again with a
fierce rush.  But it was its last.  Mark's sword was too well pointed
this time; there was a whirr, a heavy thud which made the hilt jar
against the lad's thigh, and the brave fierce bird had spitted itself so
thoroughly, that it struggled and beat its wings heavily as it lay on
the lad's lap, till he thrust out his arm to keep off the rain of blows,
and the bird fluttered itself off the rapier, and fell with the force of
a stone, down, down, out of sight.

A hoarse croak set the lad on guard again, and none too soon, for once
more he received a heavy blow from the companion raven's wing, as it
passed him with a whirr, striking the bush as well.  Then recovering
itself from the stoop which carried it low down, it sailed up again, to
prepare for another attack.

"A bad miss," muttered the lad.  "There was so little time to aim.  Now
then, come on again."

The raven was far enough away, but as if it heard the challenge, it
swept round, and came on now from the other direction, an awkward one
for Mark; but he managed to hoist himself round a little, and presented
his point steadily at the advancing bird, as it came on, looking small
at first, then rapidly appearing bigger and bigger, till, with a furious
whish through the air, it was upon him.

"Hah!" ejaculated the lad, as his right arm was swung round by the
violence of the raven's stoop, and the unfortunate bird had shared its
mate's fate, for with the rush it had not only pierced itself through
and through, but swept itself off the blade, wrenching the holder's
shoulder, and falling, fluttering feebly, downward, till it too passed
from sight.

"Well done, brave birds!" panted the lad.  "Seems too bad: but it has
saved no end of lambs.  Who'd have thought that they would fight like
that?  Why, they could have beaten me off.  Lucky I brought my sword.
Phew! it has made me hot," he muttered, as he wiped the blade carefully;
and after a little wriggling to find the hole in the scabbard, thrust
the weapon home.  "They will not come at me again; so now for our young
friends."

He began to feel the nest again, making the young birds squeal hoarsely,
and peck at him viciously as well; but after the parents' attack, this
seemed trifling, and, to his great satisfaction, he found that there was
an egg as well.

"Must get that down safe," he said.  "Old Master Rayburn will be so--"

He did not finish his sentence, for at that moment a hoarse voice
shouted: "Hallo, below!  What you doing there?"  And looking up, to his
horror he saw three heads against the sky, as their owners lay on the
cliff and looked down at him; one of the faces being that of Ralph
Darley, the others, those of two of the enemy's men.



CHAPTER SIX.

NICK GARTH MAKES A FIND.

"Hi!  Nick!  Nick, I say, hallo!"  Ralph Darley ran as he shouted at a
couple of his father's men, who were descending the slope on the eastern
side of the castle, each shouldering a short sharp pick, of the kind in
common use for hewing stone.

At first, though they must have heard, they paid no attention whatever;
but at the third angry summons, they both stopped short, looked slowly
round, and seeing their young master running, they stood still, and
waited for him to come up, which he did, panting and angry.

"You, Nick Garth," he cried; "you must have heard me call."

"Yerse," said the man addressed, a strong-built fellow, with a perfectly
smooth face, and an unpleasant-looking pair of eyes, so arranged that
they did not work properly; in fact, he could only use one at a time.
If he brought one to bear upon an object, that eye dragged its fellow
round so that the pupil dived under the man's thick nose; and if he made
an effort to see with the eclipsed one, it served its fellow in the same
way.

"You must have heard too, Ram Jennings."

"Yoss, I heared," said the other man, a dark, rather villainous-looking
fellow, whose face could not be called troubled with yellow specks, but
streaked here and there with a little whitish red, the rest being one
enormous freckle, which covered brow, cheeks, and chin.

"Then why didn't you answer?"

"Both on us stopped," said the first man addressed.

"Ay, that's so," said the other.

"Why didn't you come back, then?"

"'Cause we see you running.  Didn't we, mate?"

"Ay, that's so."

"It's your duty to come to me when your called," said Ralph hotly.  "The
man to the master, not the master to the man."

"Allus do," said Nick, looking insolently at the lad first with one eye,
and then with the other.

"Don't be impertinent, sir.  Now then, where are you two going?"

"Over yonder," said the first man surlily.

"Ay, over yonder," said the other.

"What for?"

"Fads."

"What?"

"Fads.  Young missus wants some o' they softy stones cut to build up in
the yard, round a bit o' drain pipe, to make a puddle to keep fishes
in."

"Oh!" said the lad, cooling down.  "Go and do it then; I'll wait till
the afternoon."

The men grinned, shouldered their picks, and went off, while the lad
took a few paces in another direction; but turned sharply, and called
the men again, with the same result--that is, they stood still and
waited for him to join them.

"They're a pair of thick-headed fools, that's what they are," muttered
the lad.  "I could teach a dog to be more dutiful.  Here, Nick--Ram--did
you see those soldiers who came the other day?"

"Nay, only one o' their cloak things as they left behind."

"Left a cloak behind?"

"Ay," said the second man.  "I fun' it."

"What did you do with it?"

"Burnt it.  Warn't good for nothing else."

"Do you know where they went?"

"Summun said they went to Black Tor, and old Eden set 'em to work in the
mine, and keeps 'em there," said Nick, moving his head from side to
side, so as to bring his eyes alternately to bear upon his young master.

"Oh!" said Ralph softly to himself.  Then aloud: "That will do."

The men grinned again, and went off, while Ralph walked slowly away to
where he could throw himself down at the side of the cliff in the
sunshine, swing his legs over the edge, where it was nice and dangerous
if he slipped, and finally leaned back to rest on one elbow, and gaze in
the direction of the high cliff beyond the depression, where the men
were gone to chip out pieces of the soft spongy-looking tufa, which lay
in beds on the slope.

"That's bad news," thought the lad.  "I wonder what father will say.  It
will be horrible.  They will be so strong there, that one doesn't know
what will happen, only that we shall have to fight.  Well, then," he
cried hotly, "we'll fight.  Let them come.  The Darleys have never been
beaten yet."

For the next half-hour, he lay thinking about swords, and pikes, and
armour, and big stones to cast down off the towers upon assailants, and
then his attention was taken by one of the great black ravens, flapping
its way along over the dale, and he watched it till it seemed to him to
slide down toward the cliff, a quarter of a mile away.

By-and-by he saw another great bird, and thought it the same, but
directly after, the first one reappeared, and he saw the pair cross in
the air.

"They've got a nest, and it must be on the High Cliff.  Wonder whether I
could hit one of the great thieves with a crossbow-bolt.  Be practice,"
he thought; "I may have to shoot at two-legged thieves."

Then the absurdity of his words came to him, and he laughed aloud.

"Well, ravens have only two legs.  Rather horrible, though, to shoot at
a man.  Well, I don't want to, but if they come and attack us, I'll
shoot, that I will.  What are those great birds flying to and fro for?
and, yes, now they're going round and round.  I know: a young lamb must
have gone over the cliff, and be bleating on one of the ledges because
it cannot get up.  Poor little wretch!  They'll pick its eyes out.  I'll
go and see.  Better get a crossbow first.  Might get a shot at one of
the ravens.--Bother! it's such a way to go and fetch it; and if I did,
I'll be bound to say it would want a new string, and it would take ever
so long to get ready.  Bother! it's hot, and I shan't go.  Perhaps there
isn't a lamb there, after all.  Fancy."

He rested his head upon his hand, and watched the far-off ravens,
becoming more and more convinced that a lamb had gone over.

"Then why don't they go at it?" he muttered.  "Perhaps it's a sheep, and
they're afraid to attack.  Must be something there, or they wouldn't
keep on flying to and fro like that.  Well; bother!  I don't care.
Sheep and lambs ought to know better."

He tried to take his thoughts back to the castle and its defensive
powers, if the Edens, strengthened by the gang of mercenaries, should
attack them, but it was too hard work to think of the imaginary, when
the real was before him in the shape of a pair of great black ravens,
flying round and round, and showing plainly against the great grey
crags, threatening from moment to moment to attack something down below.

"Here, I must go and see what there is to make them fly about like
that," said the lad to himself, at last, his curiosity getting the
better of his laziness; and, springing up, he began to descend the
slope, making a circuit, so as to reach the high cliff, away from the
precipice, and ascend where he could do so, unseen by the birds.

But before he was half-way down, he caught sight of the two men coming
in his direction rapidly; and as soon as they caught sight of him, they
began to gesticulate, beckoning, waving their caps, and generally
indicating that he was to hurry to their side.

"Oh, you idle beauties!" muttered Ralph.  "I should like to give you a
lesson.  Spoiled by father's indulgence, you do just as you like.  I'm
to run to you, am I?  Come here, you lazy dogs!"

He waved his hand to them in turn, but instead of coming on, they
stopped short, and pointed back toward the highest part of the cliff.

"Come here!" roared Ralph, though he knew that they were quite out of
hearing.  "You won't come, won't you?  Oh, don't I wish I was behind you
with my riding-boots on!  I'd give you such a kicking, or use the spurs.
Come here!" he roared.  "I want to send one of them for a crossbow.
Well, I don't like doing it, my fine fellows, but if you won't move, I
must.  One of you will have to go, though, and walk all the farther.
That's it.  I'm right," he continued to himself, as he saw the men keep
on pointing upwards.  "Why, what's the matter with them?  Dancing about
like that, and slapping their legs.  Stop a moment: went up the side gap
to chip out stones for Minnie.  Why--yes--no--oh! hang the ravens!
they've hit upon a vein of rich lead, and we shall be as rich as the
Edens."

Ralph set off at a trot down the slope, and this seemed to have an
effect upon the two men, who now began to run, with the result that they
were bound to meet at the bottom of the hollow between the two
eminences.

"Come on, Master Ralph!" roared Nick Garth, as they came within hearing.

"What is it?  Found lead?"

"Lead, sir, no, better than that.  There's a raven's nest over the other
side yonder."

"Bah!  What of that?" cried the lad breathlessly.  "Here, Ram, go back
to the castle, and get me a good crossbow and some bolts."

"Going to shoot 'em, master?" cried Nick excitedly.  "Well done, you!"

"If I can hit them," said the lad.  "What have they found there--a
lamb?"

"Lamb?" cried Nick.  "Hor, hor, hoh!  You are a rum one, sir.  Lamb, eh?
I call un a wolf cub."

"Wolf cub?  Oh!" cried Ralph excitedly; and the disappointment about the
lead was forgotten, the crossbow too.

"Come on, sir, this way.  Right atop, and you'll be able to look down on
un just above the big birds' nest.  He was after the young birds."

"Then that accounts for the ravens flying about so."

"Yes, sir, that's it.  We was getting close to the stone quarry, when
Ram, he says: `What's them there birds scrawking about like that there
for?' he says."

"Summut arter the young uns," I says: "and we went to where we could
look, and there was a young wolf cub, getting slowly down.  Let's fetch
the young squire," I says; "and we come after you, for I thought you'd
like to have the killing on him."

"Yes, of course, Nick; but I have no bow.  I can't reach him with my
sword, can I?"

"Tchah! you'd want a lot o' pikes tied together, and then you wouldn't
do it.  I'll show you.  There's plenty of big bits o' stone up yonder,
and you can drop 'em on his head, and send him down into the water."

"Yes," cried Ralph breathlessly, as he climbed the steep ascent; "but I
should like to catch him alive, and keep him in a cage."

"Would you, sir?  Well, that wouldn't be amiss.  Sir Morton would like
to see him, and you could tease him.  Down in one o' the dungeons would
be the place, till you got tired on him, and you could kill him then."

"Yes, but to think of his being on the cliff here!"

"Ay, it do seem a game," said the man, chuckling, and showing some ugly
yellow teeth.

As they reached about half-way up, they caught sight of one of the
ravens, shooting high above the top of the cliff, and instead of darting
away at their approach, it only made a circle round, and then descended
like an arrow.

"Tackling on him," cried Ram Jennings.

"Ay, and there goes the other," cried Nick.  "Come on, master, or
they'll finish him off before you can get there.  Real wild, they birds
is, because he's meddling with their booblins.  'Bout half-fledged,
that's what they be."

"Make haste, then," cried Ralph; and as they hurried on as fast as the
steep ascent would allow, they saw the ravens rise and stoop, again and
again.  Then only one reappeared, and a few moments later, neither.

"We shall be too late," cried Ralph excitedly.  "They must have killed
him, and are now tearing his eyes out."

"And sarve him right," cried Nick savagely.  "What does he do on our
cliff, a-maddling wi' our birds?"

"But it would be such a pity not to take him alive, Nick," panted Ralph
breathlessly.

"How were you going to catch him alive?" growled the man.  "Wouldn't
catch us going down to fight un, and you wouldn't like to crawl down
there."

"Get a rope with a loop, noose him, and drag him up," cried Ralph.

"Eh?  Hear him, Ram?  Who'd ha' thought of that?  Comes o' larning, that
does, and going away to school.  You'd never ha' thought on it, lad."

"Nay, I shouldn't ha' thought o' that," said Ram heavily; "but I've been
thinking o' somethin' else."

"What?" said Ralph, as they were mounting the last fifty feet of the
steep slope.

"As like enough he's nipped they two birds, and we'd best look out, or
he'll come sudden-like over the edge there, and run for it."

"Forward, then, quick!" cried Ralph; and pressing on, he threw himself
on his breast, and crawled the last few feet, so as to thrust his head
over the edge and gaze down, to see the so-called wolf's cub sheathe his
sword, and prepare to get the young ravens out of their nesting recess
in the face of the cliff.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

THE YOUNG ENEMIES.

Eden recovered his presence of mind on the instant, and looking coolly
up at Nick Garth, who had shouted at him so insolently, he replied
haughtily: "What is it to you, sir?  Be off!"

Then, entirely ignoring Ralph, who was looking down, breathless with
rage and exertion, he carefully withdrew the egg from the nest, in spite
of the pecking of the young ravens, and transferred it to the lining of
his cap.

After this he took off his kerchief, and began to twist it up tightly to
make an apology for a line with which to tie together the young ravens'
legs.

The two men on either side of Ralph looked at him, as if wondering what
he would say.

"Now, then, it's of no use to peck: out you come, my fine fellows.
Quiet, or I'll wring your necks."

As Mark spoke, his right hand was in the nest, feeling about so as to
get four legs together in his grasp, but this took some little time, and
a great deal of fluttering and squealing accompanied the act.  But as he
worked, Mark thought hard, and of something else beside ravens.  How was
he to get out of this unpleasant fix, being as he was quite at his
enemy's mercy?  But all the same, with assumed nonchalance, he drew out
the fluttering ravens, loosened his hold of the shrub with his left
hand, and trusted to his powers of retaining his balance, in spite of
the birds' struggles, while in the coolest way possible he transferred
the legs from his right hand to his left, and proceeded to tie them
tightly.

"There you are," he said.  "I think that's safe."

Then, to Ralph's astonishment, the lad began to hum over his song again
about the ravens as, completely ignoring those above, he took hold of
the bush again, and leaned forward to gaze down into the dizzy depths as
if in search of an easy path, but really to try and make out, in his
despair, what would be his chance of escape if he suddenly rose to his
feet and boldly jumped outward.  Would he clear all the trees and come
down into the river?  And if the last, would it be deep enough to save
him from injury at the bottom?

Where he had crossed was only ankle deep, but there was a broad, still
patch, close up under the cliff, for he had noticed it as he came; but
whether he could reach it in a bold leap, and whether it would be deep
enough to save him from harm, he could not tell; but he was afraid that
if he missed it he would be broken upon the pieces of rock which had
fallen from above.

That way of escape was too desperate, and the more repellent from the
fact that the beech-trees below prevented him from seeing what awaited
him.

He busied himself in pretending to examine the knot he had made about
the birds' legs, and then, raising his sword-belt, he passed one young
raven inside, leaving the other out, so that they hung from his back,
not in a very comfortable position for them, but where they would not be
hurt.  All the time though the lad was scanning the rocky face, first to
right then to left, to seek for a way by which he could climb down,
escape upwards being impossible; and he had quickly come to the
conclusion that if unmolested he could manage, by taking his time, to
get down in safety.

He had just decided this when Ralph, who had remained perfectly silent,
exclaimed abruptly, "Now then, come up."

Mark took not the slightest notice, and the order was repeated.

"Hear what the young master says?" growled Nick.  "Come up!"

"Are you speaking to me, fellow?" cried Mark angrily.  "Be off, I tell
you, before I come up and chastise you."

"Going to stand this, Master Ralph?" growled the man.  "Shall I heave a
bit o' stone down upon him, and knock him off?"

For answer, Ralph drew back out of sight, and the two men followed at a
sign, leaving Mark alone, seated upon his perilous perch; but directly
after Ralph's head reappeared, and Nick's close beside it, when Mark
realised--rightly--that the other man had been sent on some mission--
what, he could not tell, but in all probability to fetch more help, so
as to be sure of taking him.

"Now," said Ralph sternly, "are you coming up to surrender?"

"What!" said Mark sharply; "why am I to surrender to you?"

"For trespass and robbery.  This is my father's land, and those are our
birds."

Mark laughed scornfully to hide his annoyance, for conscience pricked
hard.

"Your land, indeed!" he cried.  "Wild moorland, open to anybody; and as
to the birds, are all the crows yours too?"

Ralph did not condescend to reply, but lay there looking down at the
young representative of his father's rival.

"I wish you good day, Master Owner of the land, and lord of the birds of
the air," said Mark mockingly.  "If you had asked me civilly, I might
perhaps have given you a young raven.  As it is, I shall not."

"What are you going to do?" said Ralph sharply.  "Wait and see," was the
mocking reply.  "Shan't I heave this stone down on his head, Master
Ralph?" said Nick in a low tone; but the words came plainly to Mark's
ear, and sent a cold chill of horror thrilling through his nerves; but
he felt better the next moment, and then anger took the place of dread,
for Ralph said sharply, "Put the stone down, sirrah!  You know I want to
take the wolf's cub alive."

"Wolf's cub!" said Mark to himself.  "Never mind; I may meet him some
day when it is not three to one, and then he shall find that the wolf's
cub can bite."

Then, conscious that his every movement was watched, he cautiously rose
to his feet, made an effort to ignore the presence of lookers-on, and
began to climb sideways along the ledge, by the route he had come.
Still he had no intention of going up, knowing full well that he would
only be giving himself up to insult, and perhaps serious injury, taken
at a disadvantage, as he felt that he must be; but calmly, and in the
most sure-footed way, sidled along, with the ledge getting more and more
narrow, but the hand-hold better.

In this way he passed the spot where he had lowered himself down, and
reached a slight angle, by which he expected, from long experience in
cliff-climbing, to be able to descend to the next.

He was quite right, and it proved to be easier than he had expected; but
a looker-on would have shuddered to see the way in which the lad clung
to the rough stones, where the slightest slip would have sent him down
headlong for at least three hundred feet before he touched anywhere, and
then bounded off again, a mere mass of shapeless flesh.

Mark knew of his danger, but it did not trouble him, for his brain was
too much occupied by the presence of young Darley; and as he descended
he felt a slight flush of pride in doing what he was certain his young
enemy dare not attempt.

In a moment or two he was standing safely--that is, so long as he held
on tightly with his fingers in the crack above--upon the next ledge, a
few inches wide, and his intention had been to go on in the same
direction, so as to be farther from his watchers; but he was not long in
finding that this was impossible, and he had to go back till he was well
beneath Ralph Darley, and saw that he must go farther still before he
attempted to descend to the next rest for his feet.

"It will take a long time to get down like this," he thought; "and
perhaps he'll send below to meet me at the bottom.  Perhaps that is what
he has already done.  But never mind; I shall have done as I liked, and
not obeyed his insolent orders.  Let him see, too, that I'm quite at
home on the rocks, and can do as I like.  Wonder whether I shall get
Master Rayburn's egg down safely!  Not if they throw a stone down upon
my head.--Now for it."

He had reached another comparatively easy place for descending from the
course of blocks on which he stood, when he suddenly found himself
embarrassed, not by the egg, but by the young birds, which nearly upset
his equilibrium by beginning all at once to struggle and flap vigorously
with their half-fledged wings.

The lad's first impulse, as he clung to the ledge, was to tear the birds
from his belt and throw them down; but his spirit revolted from the
cruelty of the proceeding, and his vanity helped to keep the trophies of
his daring where they were.

"It would look as if I was afraid," he said to himself; and lowering one
foot, he felt for a safe projection, found one, and his other foot
joined the first.  A few seconds later his hands were holding the ledge
on which he had just been standing, but his chin was level with them,
and his feet were feeling for the next ledge below, but feeling in vain.

He was disappointed, for experience had taught him that this course of
stones would be about the same thickness as the others, and yet he could
find no crack, not even one big enough to insert his toes.

But he was quite right; the range of stones in that stratum was just
about the same thickness as the others, but the crack between them and
the next in the series, the merest line, over which his feet slipped
again and again, giving him the impression that they were passing over
solid stone; and the birds chose this awkward moment to renew their
struggling and screaming.

"You miserable little wretches," he muttered; "be quiet!  Well, it might
be worse.  I should have been in a sad pickle if the old birds had
chosen this moment to attack me."

He hung in the same position, with his chin resting on the ledge, as
well as his hands, till the birds were quiet again, and then wondering
whether Ralph Darley was still watching, he slowly let his muscles
relax, and his body subside, till he hung at full stretch, seeking
steadily the while for foot-hold, but finding none, and forced now to
look down between his chest and the rock, to see how far the next ledge
might be.

To his disgust, it was quite two feet lower, and it was forced upon him
that unless he could climb back to the ledge upon which his hands were
clasped, he must let himself drop to the resting-place below.

It was no time for hesitation, and condensing his energies upon what he
knew to be a difficult task, he drew himself up by strong muscular
contraction till his chin once more rested between his hands, and then
grasped the bitter fact that to get up and stand upon the ledge was
impossible; it was too narrow, and he could find no foot-hold to help.

Accepting the position, he let himself sink again to the full length of
his arms, hung motionless for a few moments, and then, keeping himself
perfectly rigid, allowed his fingers to glide over the stone, and
dropped the two feet to the ledge below, perfectly upright and firm.  In
all probability he would have found hand-hold the next moment, but,
scared anew by the rush through the air, the young ravens began to flap
their wings violently, and that was sufficient to disturb the lad's
equilibrium.  He made a desperate effort to recover it, but one foot
gave way, and he fell, scraping the edge.

Another desperate effort, and he clung to the ledge for a brief moment
or two, and then a yell arose from above, as he went down a few feet and
felt what seemed a violent blow against his side.  The next instant his
hands had closed upon the tough stem of a stunted yew, and he was
hanging there, hitched in the little branches, saved from falling
farther, but unable to move from the fear of tearing the shrub from its
root-hold in a crack of the cliff, where there was not a trace of
anything else to which he could cling.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

HOW RALPH SECURED THE WOLF'S CUB.

The perspiration broke out in great drops upon Mark Eden's face; and for
some minutes he hung there, expecting moment by moment that each was his
last, for he knew that he could do nothing, and that he must not stir
hand or foot.

And now he began to realise how mad his attempt had been.  Better far
that he had resigned himself to circumstances, and climbed back to the
top.  But even then he felt he could not have done this.  It would have
been like humbling himself to an enemy of his house, and a flush of
pride came into his pallid cheeks as he felt that he had boldly played
his part.  Then a sense of misery and despair crept over him as he
thought of home, of his father and sister, and their sorrow when they
knew of his fate.

All that passed off, and a flush of anger and indignation made his
temples throb, for he distinctly heard Nick Garth say,--

"Why not?  Heave it down yourself, then, and put him out of his misery."

What else was said he could not make out; voices were in hurried
converse evidently a short distance back from the edge of the cliff, and
then Mark recognised Ralph's tones, as he said huskily,--

"Can you hold on?"

A bitter defiant taunt came to Mark's lips, and he cried,--

"Your doing, coward!  Are you satisfied with your work?"

There was no answer, but the hurried murmur came over the edge of the
cliff again, followed by what sounded like angry commands, and then all
was silent for a few moments.

"Don't move," cried Ralph then.  "I've sent for help.  They've gone for
ropes.  One will be here directly.  I sent for it before.  Can you hold
on?"

Mark made no reply, for no words would come.  Hope had sprung up at the
possibility of escape, for life seemed then to be very sweet, but there
was a bitterness to dull the bright thought, for the lad felt that it
was the hated enemy of his house who was trying to help.

Then a dull feeling of apathy, as if he had been half stunned, came over
him as he hung there in a terribly cramped position, with his face
pressed against the wall.

And now, as if his hearing had become sharpened, the murmur of the
rushing river came up quite loudly, and the wind seemed to be gathering
force, while all this was, as it were, preparatory to his falling
headlong down.  Then he must have lost his senses for some little time,
for the next thing he heard was a voice crying out, in tones full of
despair,--

"Too short, too short, Ram!"

"Ay, so it be.  Good ten foot."

"Could I help him if you lowered me down?"

"Lower you down?  Are you mad?  I couldn't hold you; and you'd break
your neck."

Mark heard every word now, for his senses had suddenly recovered their
tone and something more.

Then what seemed to be another long space of time elapsed, and Ralph
shouted to him,--

"This rope is too short, but there'll be another here soon."

Mark could make no reply, and he hung there, listening to the murmur of
voices once more.  Then the rush of the river sounded like the distant
boom of thunder.  There was a loud _cizz_, _cizz_, going on somewhere on
the cliff face from a cricket, and the birds were singing more loudly
than he ever remembered to have heard them before.

Once more his senses must have left him and come back, for he heard the
voice above louder than ever, followed by Ralph shouting,--

"Can you tie the rope round you?"

Mark could not answer for some little time; then his lips parted, and he
gasped out the one word,--

"No."

A sharp rustling followed, as of a rope being rapidly drawn up.  Then it
was lowered again; and as Mark strained his eyes round into the left
corners to get a glimpse, he saw a loop swinging to and fro, and it
struck him again and again; but those who lowered it, in the hope of
noosing the lad and drawing him up, soon found that the bush and the
sufferer's position precluded this.

"Can you push your arms through the loop, and hang on?" cried Ralph now.

"No," was the discouraging reply, for Mark fully realised the fact that
if he loosened his desperate hold for a moment he must fall.

"Haul up!" shouted Ralph.  "Quick!"

The rope rattled and scraped again; and then, as Mark hung there,
half-insensible, he heard what sounded like quarrelling.

"You shan't go, Master Ralph.  Who's to meet Sir Morton if you get a
fall trying to save a thing like that?"

Even in his half-insensible state Mark felt a quiver run through him;
and then he lay listening again, as if to hear what was taking place
about some one else.

"Silence!" came to his ear.  "How dare you, sir!  Now, all of you lower
me down."

There was a rustling and scraping directly after, which seemed to last a
long time, before something brushed against the listener, and he
quivered, for he felt that he was going.  Then there was a panting
noise, which came up, as it were, out of the darkness, and he was
clutched tightly, hot breath came upon his cheek, and a hoarse voice
yelled in his ear,--

"Got him!  Haul up steadily!" and directly after, the voice became a
whisper, which said,--

"Pray God the rope may not break."

Mark was conscious now of being scraped against the rock, and brushed by
twigs, for what seemed to be a very long time, before he was roughly
seized by more hands, and dragged heavily over the cliff edge, to be
dropped upon the short grass, as a voice he had heard before cried
harshly,--

"You've done it now, Master Ralph, and got your wolf cub after all."

"Yes," panted Ralph hoarsely, as Mark felt as if a cloud had suddenly
rolled away from his sight, and he saw clearly that half-a-dozen men
were surrounding him, and Ralph Darley, his greatest enemy, was kneeling
at his side, saying softly,--

"Yes, I've got the wolf cub after all;" and then the two lads' eyes met,
and gazed deeply into each other's in a curious stare.

That stare had the same effect on both lads--that of making them feel
uncomfortable.

Mark Eden, as he recovered from the shock of being so near a terrible
ending to his young life, felt that, surrounded as he was by enemies, he
ought to spring to his feet, draw his sword, and defend himself to the
last; while Ralph Darley knew that, according to all old family
traditions, he ought to order his men to seize a hand and foot each,
give his young enemy two or three swings, and launch him headlong off
the mighty cliff, and then stand and laugh at the capers he would cut in
his fall.

For people had been very savage in their revenges out in that wild part
of England, shut away from the civilisation of the time by moor and
mountain.  Ralph knew, too, that though they were better then than in
the early days of the Wars of the Roses, they were still brutal enough,
and that he would gain the applause and respect of his men by giving
them the order.  But Mark Eden had not drawn his sword to begin cutting
and thrusting; and instead of leaving the lad to hang till he fell, he,
Ralph Darley, had, in opposition to his father's men, risked his own
life to save that of his enemy--going down over a hundred feet, swinging
at the end of a couple of ropes badly tied together.

"Seems very stupid," the two lads thought.

"What does he mean by coming here, and getting into such a horrible
position--an idiot!" said Ralph to himself.

"How dare he, an insolent Darley, come down by a rope and save my life!"
said Mark to himself.

Then there was an awkward pause, with the two lads scowling, and
avoiding each other's gaze, and the men nudging one another, and winking
knowingly.  Nick Garth whispering behind his hand to Ram Jennings, that
the young cocks would set up their hackles directly, whip out their
spurs, and there would be a fight; and, in expectation of this, the men,
six in number, now spread themselves into an arc, whose chord was the
edge of the cliff, thus enclosing the pair so as to check any design on
the part of the enemy to make a rush and escape.

Mark, who did not feel so breathless and numb now, sat up on the grass,
and resumed his old role of ignoring his enemies, putting his hands
behind him, to feel for the ravens hung from his sword-belt, taking them
out from their awkward position, to find that they were limp and
literally crushed.  The reason for this was that when Ralph, as he
swung, seized him, he had to do this from behind, clasping him round the
chest, just under the arms, and then, as the rope was hauled, flinging
his legs about him to help to hold, with the consequence that they
formed a sort of sandwich, he and Mark being the slices of bread, and
the young ravens the meat.

"Hah!" said Mark softly, as if to himself; "you two will never dig out
any young lambs' eyes.  Feed the fishes instead;" and, rising to his
feet, he untied his kerchief from about the dead birds' legs, and gave
each a swing, sending it on its first and last flight, out from the
cliff edge, away into the gulf.

"Now's your time, Master Ralph," whispered Nick, "Whip out your sword,
and show him how you can fight."

Ralph turned upon the man with an angry glance, and Nick shrank back
into his old position with a sheepish grin, which, in conjunction with
his cross eyes, did not improve his personal appearance.

Without so much as glancing at his enemies, Mark now took off his cap
and smiled, for the egg he had so carefully placed in the lining was
intact.

"Well done!" he said aloud.  "That's for Master Rayburn at the cottage.
Here, one of you fellows, take that to him, and say I sent it.  I dare
say he'll give you a coin for your trouble."

Ram Jennings made an awkward shoot forward, and seized the egg.

"Don't break it, clumsy," cried Mark; and then with a quick motion, he
threw his cap on the grass, took a step or two back toward the edge of
the cliff, and, quick as lightning, drew his sword.

"There," he cried, with a scornful look at Ralph; "seven of you to one.
Come on."

A low growl from the men greeted this display, but Ralph did not stir,
and Mark stood for a moment or two _en garde_.  Then with a bitter laugh
he continued: "I suppose I must surrender.  You don't draw.  Take my
sword.  My arm's wrenched, and I can't use it."

As he spoke he threw his sword at Ralph's feet; his enemy picked it up
by the slight blade, and the men closed in.

This movement sent a flash of anger from their young master's eyes.

"Back," he cried hoarsely.  Then taking a step or two toward Mark, and
still holding the sword by the blade, he presented the hilt to his
enemy.  "Take your sword, sir," he said haughtily.  "The Darleys are
gentlemen, not cowards, to take advantage of one who is down.  That is
the nearest way back to Black Tor," he continued, pointing.

For a few moments Mark stood gazing at his enemy, with his face flushing
to his temples; then turning haggard and pale, as a flood of mingled
sensations rushed through him; shame, mortification, pride, anger
against self, seemed to choke all utterance, and he could not even stir.
He felt that he wanted to be brave and manly, and apologise for his
words--to thank the gallant lad before him for saving his life--to make
him see that he was a gentleman--to strike him and make him fight--to do
something brave--despicable--to do he did not know what--before he
accepted this permission to go, but he could for the moment do nothing--
say nothing.

At last, with a hoarse gasp, he literally snatched at the sword, and
glared at his enemy with a menacing look, as if he were about to thrust
at him; and Ralph's hand darted to his own hilt, but with an angry
gesture, he let it fall, and stood firm.

Then a cry, mingled of rage and shame, escaped from Mark; and he thrust
his sword back into its sheath, and pushing Nick aside, as the man stood
in his way, he hurried down the hill.

"Yah-h-ah!" growled Nick savagely, "you aren't going to let him off like
that, master?"

Mark heard the words, and turned round.

"How dare you speak to me like that!" cried Ralph, glad of some one on
whom to vent the anger he felt.

"Because Sir Morton, if he'd been here, would have had that young Eden
tied neck and heels, and pitched into one of the cells.  Because you're
a coward, sir.  There!"

"Ah-h-ah!" growled the other men in chorus, as they glared at the lad.

"Then take a coward's blow," cried Ralph; and he struck the man with all
his might across the face, using the back of his hand.

There was another growl from the men, but no one spoke, and Mark Eden
turned again, and strode down the hill, while the men untied and coiled
up the ropes, and slowly followed their young master down the slope, and
then up once more toward the Castle, Nick Garth shaking his head a good
deal, and looking puzzled, and a great deal interested in the blood
which he kept smudging off, first with one hand, and then with the
other, from his face.

"Here," he cried at last, as Ralph disappeared through the gateway,
"what's best to stop this here?  I can't go with it all tied up."

"Bucket o' water from the well," said Ram Jennings, grinning.  "Say,
Nick, he aren't such a coward, arter all."

"No," growled Nick, after a double wipe; "and, for such a little 'un, he
can hit hard."



CHAPTER NINE.

ANOTHER TURN OF FORTUNE'S WHEEL.

Master Rayburn received the raven's addled egg, and gave Ram Jennings a
groat for his trouble, and for telling him all about how it was
obtained, and what followed, keeping the man, and questioning him a good
deal, as he smiled and frowned over the task he began at once, that of
chipping a good-sized hole in one side of the egg, and extracting its
contents in a little wooden bowl of clean water.

At last, after a great deal of sniffing and shuffling about, the man
said, "Done with me, Master Rayburn?"

"Yes," said the old man sharply.  "Unless you can tell me any more.  But
why?"

"Well, master, I'm pretty hard about the smell, and it falls to me to
clean out the pigsties; and when they've been left a month or two in the
summer, and got pretty ripe, they aren't so nice as bean-fields in
bloom, or the young missus's roses in her bit o' garden; but pigsties
aren't nothing to that there _egg_.  It's enough to pyson a black dog."

"Be off with you, then," said the old man, with a dry chuckle; and as
soon as he was alone, he threw the foul water away.  "Yes," he muttered,
"it does smell; but that's a splendid egg, and not stained a bit."

"Hah!" he ejaculated a few minutes later.  "I'd have given something to
be there.  Brave lads.  True English, to the backbone; but with their
young minds warped and spoiled by the traditions of this miserable feud.
Why, it must have been grand," mused the old man, shaking his grey
locks.  "How I should have liked to see and hear it all!  What a fight
to master the inborn hatred!  On both sides the evil contending with the
good; and, according to that man's telling, that boy Mark did not show
up well.  I don't know, though!  He could not help it.  He had to fight
the black blood in his veins that has been handed down for generations.
So young Ralph saved his life, made him prisoner, and set him at liberty
like a true honest gentleman; and the other had to battle with his
dislike and bitterness at receiving a favour from his enemy's hands.

"Good Heavens!" he cried aloud.  "Enemy's!  What contemptible worms we
are, to dare to nurse up such a feeling from father to son, generation
after generation!  Why, with them it is an hereditary disease.  But who
knows?  Those two lads may grow up to be friends, and kill the old feud.
They cannot help respecting each other after such an encounter as that.
I'll try and get hold of young Darley, and then of Mark; and perhaps I
may be able to--Bah! you weak-minded, meddlesome old driveller!" he
cried impetuously.  "You would muddle, and spoil all, when perhaps a
Higher Hand is at work, as it always is, to make everything tend toward
the best.

"But I should like to be present, by accident, the next time those two
lads meet."

The meeting took place before many days had passed.

In the interim Ralph Darley had told his father all that had happened,
and Sir Morton had frowned, and looked pleased, and frowned again.

"You think I did wrong father," said the lad.

"No, my boy; I think you behaved splendidly; but you see what a
miserable race those Edens are.  You do good to one of them, a boy of
your own age, and he is ready to turn and rend you."

"But I did not go on purpose to do good to him, father.  I meant to
catch him, tie him hand and foot, and bring him here to do what you
liked with him."

"Never mind: you acted bravely; and he like a roused wolf's cub, as Nick
Garth called him."

"Felt humbled," said Ralph thoughtfully.

"Yes, my boy.  Well, it's all over; but don't go risking your life again
for your enemies.  We don't want to quarrel with them unless they force
it on, and I'm afraid they are going to, for I believe Eden has enlisted
that gang of ruffians in his service.  I can't hear that they were seen
to go away."

Mark Eden told his father too, about the incident, and Sir Edward looked
very grave.

"As the lad was a Darley, matters are different," he said at last, "and
I don't like your conduct over the matter, Mark.  To begin with--well,
to go all through the business, you did wrong."

"Yes, father," said the lad bitterly.

"It was not right for you, a young scholar, and a gentleman, to go upon
their land and invite a quarrel."

"But I wanted the young ravens, father."

"Yes.  And they want my lead-mine; and if young Darley comes to try and
take it, I hope you'll break his neck."

"Yes, father."

"But you did not come out well, my boy," said Sir Edward irritably.
"The young cub has some good in him, and he behaved splendidly."

"Yes, father; that made me feel so mad against him, and all the time I
was feeling as if I would have given anything to shake hands, for he was
very brave."

"Well, it would have been, if he had not been a Darley."

"And, of course, I could not shake hands and say thank you to a boy like
him."

"Shake hands--an Eden with a Darley!  Impossible, my boy, impossible.
There, it's all over, and you must never give them the opportunity of
insulting you again.  That family has done us endless injury."

"And we've done them a deal, too, father."

"Yes, my boy, as much as ever we could.  I mean in the old days; for I'm
beginning to think that it's best to let them go their way, if they let
us go ours."

"Yes, father."

"I wish they lived on the other side of the county, instead of so near.
But there, promise me that you will not run foul of any of the savages
again."

"Yes, father, I promise you," said the lad quietly.

"By the way, Mark, you say young Darley had half-a-dozen ruffianly
fellows with him, and they wanted to stone you, and then throw you off
the cliff?"

"Yes, father."

"Do you think any of them were part of the rough crew who came here with
that red-faced captain?"

"I think not, father."

"I'm afraid they went to Sir Morton Darley; so we must be watchful.  Let
that other trouble drop now, and be careful for the future.  Don't worry
me now; Rugg wants to see me about the mining accounts.  Keep out of
mischief, and don't let me hear any more about young Darley."

Mark promised, and went out with the intention of going down the river
to see old Master Rayburn, and ask him whether he had received the egg.
But before he had gone far, the memories of the whole business seemed so
distasteful, and he felt so much annoyed with himself, that he turned
back.

"He'd make me tell him all about it, and I feel as if I couldn't,"
muttered the lad.  "It tastes more and more bitter every time I think
about it, and if Master Rayburn began to ask me questions, he'd get it
all out of me, for he has such a way of doing it.  I don't believe any
one could tell him a lie without being found out.  Of course I shouldn't
tell him one.  No, I won't go.  He'd say that I behaved badly, and I
don't want to be told, for though I wouldn't own it, I know it better
than any one could tell me.  Hang the Darleys!  I wish there wasn't one
on the face of the earth."

So, instead of going to old Master Rayburn's cottage, Mark walked back
to the Black Tor, and after making up his mind to go down into the
lead-mine, and chip off bits of spar, he went and talked to his sister,
and told her, naturally enough, all that had passed.

Mary Eden, who was about a year older, and very like him in feature,
shuddered a good deal over parts of his narration, and looked tearful
and pained at the end.

"What's the matter?" he said, rather roughly; "why, you're going to
cry!"

"I can't help it, Mark," she said sadly.

"Why: what makes you look like that?" said the lad irritably.

"Because--because--" she faltered.

"Well, because--because--" he cried mockingly.

"Because what?"

"Don't be angry with me, dear.  My brother Mark seems as if he behaved
like a Darley, and that young Darley like my brother Mark."

"Oh!" cried the lad, jumping up in a rage; and he rushed off, in spite
of an appealing cry from Mary, and went down into the mine after all,
where he met Dummy Rugg, old Dan's son, and went for a ramble in the
very lowest and grimmest parts, feeling as if to get away from the light
of day would do him good, for his sister's words had struck very deeply
into his heart.

It was a gloomy place, that mine, and opened out into strange cavernous
places, eaten away by water, or by strange crackings and subsidences of
the earth, in the far distant ages when the boiling springs of the
volcanic regions were depositing the beds of tufa, here of immense
thickness, springs which are still in evidence, but no longer to pour
out waters that scald, but of a gentle lukewarm or tepid temperature,
which go on depositing their suspended stone to this day, though in a
feeble, sluggish manner.

Dan Rugg was Sir Edward's chief man over the mine.  Not a gentleman
superintendent, but a genuine miner, who gave orders, and then helped to
carry them out.  He had the credit of knowing more about mines than any
man in the midland counties, knowledge gathered by passing quite half
his life underground like a mole.

Dummy was his only child, so-called on account of his being a
particularly silent, stupid-looking boy.  But old Dan said he was not
such a fool as he looked, and Dan was right.

Dummy hailed his young master's coming with quiet satisfaction, for Mark
was almost the only being to whom he ever said much; and as soon as he
saw him come to where he was at work, he walked with him to a chest, and
took out a flint and steel and a good supply of home-made candles,
without stopping to ask questions; and then lighting one, he handed it
to Mark, and led off into the part of the mine where the men were not at
work.

"Aren't you going to take a candle, Dummy?" said Mark.

"No, master; I can manage."

"I believe you can see in the dark, like a rat or an owl.  Can you?"

"Not very well, Master Mark; but I can see a bit.  Got used to it, I
s'pose."

"Well, why are you going down there?" asked Mark.

"'Cause I thought you'd like to see the place I found while you were at
school."

"Ah!  Is it worth seeing?"

"Dunno.  It's big."

"Been dug out?"

"Nay.  It's a big split as goes up ever so far, and goes down ever so
far.  Chucked bits down; and they were precious long 'fore they hit
bottom.  There's a place over the other side too, and I clum round to
it, and it goes in and in, farther than I could stop to go.  Thought I'd
wait till you came home."

"That's right, Dummy.  We will not go to-day; but start early some
morning, and take a basket and bottle with us."

"Ay, that's the way.  Water's warm in there, I think."

By degrees, from old acquaintance and real liking for the dull heavy
lad, who looked up to him as a kind of prince, Mark dropped into telling
his adventures over the ravens, while they trudged along the black
passages, with Dummy leading, Mark still carrying the candle, and the
lad's huge long shadow going first of all.

The miner's son listened without a word, drinking in the broken
disconnected narrative, as if not a word ought to be lost, and when it
was ended, breaking out with: "Wish I'd been there."

"I wish you had, Dummy.  But if you had been, what would you have done?"

"I d'know, Master Mark.  I aren't good out in the daylight; but I can
get along on the cliffs.  I'd ha' come down to you.  I should just like
to ketch any one heaving stones down upon you.  I wonder that young
Darley didn't kill you, though, when he'd cotched you.  We should ha'
killed him, shouldn't us, sir?"

"Don't know, Dummy," said the lad shortly.  "Let's talk about something
else."

Dummy was silent; and they went on and on till Mark spoke again.

"Well," he said, "found any good bits of spar for Miss Mary?"

"Lots, sir.  One big bit with two points like a shovel handle.  Clear as
glass."

There was another silence, and then Mark spoke again.

"What's going on?"

"Witches, master."

"Eh?  What?"

"Things comes in the night, and takes lambs, and fowls, and geese."

"You mean thieves."

"Nay, not like thieves, master.  Old Mother Deggins saw 'em the other
night, and they fluttered and made a noise--great black witches, in long
petticoats and brooms.  It was a noise like thunder, and a light like
lightnin', she says, and it knocked her down night afore last; and she
won't live in the cottage no longer, but come next to ours."

"Somebody tried to frighten her."

"P'r'aps.  Frightened two of our men too.  They was coming back from
Gatewell over the hills; and they see a light up by Ergles, where there
aren't no lights, and they crep' up to see what it was, and looked down
and see a fire, with a lot of old witches in long gowns leaning over it,
and boiling something in a pot; and they think it's babies."

"Why do they think that?"

"I d'know, master.  Because they thought so, I think.  Then, as they
were looking, all at once there was a ter'ble squirty noise, and a rush
like wings; and there was no fire, and nothing to see.  Glad I warn't
there.  Wouldn't go across the moor by Ergles for anything."

"But you're not afraid to come along here in the dark."

"'Fraid, Master Mark?  No: why should I be?  Nothing to hurt you here."

"You're a queer fellow, Dummy," said Mark.

"Yes, master.  That's what father says.  I s'pose it's through being so
much in the mine."

"I suppose so.  But you don't mind?"

"Mind, Master Mark?  I like it.  Wish you was at home more, though.--I
say--"

"Well?"

"If ever you go to fight the Darleys, take me, Master Mark."

"I shall not go to fight the Darleys, Dummy.  They may come to fight us,
and if they do, you shall come and help."

"Hah!" ejaculated the rough-looking boy.  "I'm pretty strong now.  If
they come and meddle with us, do you know what I should like to do,
Master Mark."

"No: hammer them, I suppose."

"Nay; I should like to drive 'em all down to the place I'm going to show
you."

"Well, where is it?"

"Oh, ever so far yet.  'N'our away."

Mark whistled in surprise.

"Not tired, are you, sir?"

"Tired?  No; but I didn't think you could go so far."

"Oh yes, you can, sir, if you don't mind crawling a bit now and then.
You can go miles and miles where the stone's split apart.  I think it's
all cracks under the hills."

"On you go, then; but don't you want a candle?"

"No, sir; I can see best like this, with you holding the light behind."

Mark relapsed into silence, and his guide remained silent too, and went
on and on, along passages formed by the busy miners of the past, in
following the lode of lead, and along ways that were nature's work.

At last, fully an hour after Dummy had announced how far they had to go,
he stopped short, took a candle, lit it, and looked smilingly at Mark,
who gazed round the natural cavern in which they were, and then turned
to his guide.

"Well," he said, "is this it?  Not much of a place.  I thought you said
it went farther."

"So it does, Master Mark.  Shut your eyes while you count a hundred."

Mark obeyed, and counted his hundred aloud, opened his eyes again, and
he was alone.

"Here!  Where are you?" he cried; and he looked about the place, up and
down, but to all appearances, he was in a _cul de sac_, whose walls were
dotted with the fossil stems of _pentacrinites_, over which stalagmitic
petrifaction had gradually formed, looking as if dirty water had run
over the walls in places, and hardened in the course of time to stone.

"Here, Dummy!  Haven't run back, have you?" shouted Mark, as it occurred
to him that should the boy have played him a trick, he would have no
little difficulty in getting back to the part where the men were at
work.

But there was no occasion for so loud a cry; the words had hardly passed
his lips when a hand holding a candle suddenly appeared against the wall
in front, and upon stepping to it, he found that the sheet of stalagmite
there, instead of touching the wall, was a foot away, leaving room for
any one to creep up a steep slope for thirty or forty feet, and continue
the way through a long crevice, whose sides looked as if they might have
separated only a few hours before.

"This is the way," said Dummy, and he led on for a quarter of an hour
longer, with a peculiar rushing noise growing louder, till it became a
heavy dull roar, as the narrow crack through which they had passed
suddenly opened out into a vast cavity which, below the ledge on which
they stood, ended in gloom, and whose roof was lost in the same
blackness; but the echoes of the falling water below told them that it
must be far enough above their heads.

"What a horrible hole!" cried Mark.

"Yes; big," said Dummy.  "Look: I climbed along there.  It's easy; and
then you can go right on, above where the water comes in.  It's warm in
here."

"Yes, warm enough."

"Shall we go any farther?"

"No, not to-day.  Let's stop and look.  Shall I throw down my candle?"

"No, Master Mark: it's no good.  Goes out too soon.  I'll light a
match."

He took an old-fashioned brimstone match from his breast, lit both its
pointed ends, waited till the sulphur was fluttering its blue flame, and
the splint was getting well alight and blackening, and then he reached
out and let it fall, to go burning brightly down and down, as if into a
huge well.  Then it went out, and they seemed for the moment to be in
darkness.

"I don't think it's very, very deep," said Dummy quietly; "but it's all
water over yonder.  Seen enough, Master Mark!"

"Yes, for one day.  Let's go back now."

Dummy topped the long wicks with his natural snuffers, to wit, his
finger and thumb, and led the way back, after Mark had taken a final
glance at the vast chasm.

"So you found this place out, Dummy?"

"Yes, Master Mark.  I'm always looking for new holes when I've nothing
to do and the men aren't at work."

"It's of no use: there's no lead."

"No: aren't any ore.  All spar and stones like this."

"Well, we must bring hammers and find some good pieces next time we
come."

"And go on along by the water, Master Mark?"

"If you like.  Want to find how far it goes?"

"Yes: I want to find how far it goes, master.  Perhaps it opens
somewhere.  I often think we must come out somewhere on the other side."

"That would be queer," said Mark thoughtfully; "but I don't think my
father would be pleased.  Seem like making a way for the Darleys to come
in and attack us."

Dummy stopped short, and turned to stare open-mouthed at his young
chief.

"What a head you've got, Master Mark," he said.  "I never thought of
that."

"Didn't you?  Well, you see now: we don't want to find another way in."

"Yes, we do, if there is one, Master Mark, and stop it up."

Very little more was said as they went back, Mark becoming thoughtful,
and too tired to care about speaking.  But that night he lay in bed
awake for some time, thinking about the visit to the cavernous mine, and
how it honeycombed the mountainous place: then about Dummy's witches,
and the fire and caldron, at the mouth of the hole by Ergles, a mighty
limestone ridge about three miles away.  Then after a laugh at the easy
way in which the superstitious country people were alarmed, he fell
asleep, to begin a troublous dream, which was mixed up in a strangely
confused way with the great chasm in the mine, down which he had worked
his way to get at the ravens' nest: and then he started into
wakefulness, as he was falling down and down, hundreds upon hundreds of
feet, to find his face wet with perspiration, and that he had been lying
upon his back.



CHAPTER TEN.

IN A WASP'S NEST.

Days had passed, and strange reports were flying about the sparsely
inhabited neighbourhood.  Fresh people had seen the witches in their
long gowns, and it was rumoured that if any one dared to make the
venture, they might be found crouching over their fire any dark, stormy
night on the slope of Ergles, where nobody ever went, for it was a
desolate waste, where a goat might have starved.

The tales grew like snowballs, as they passed from mouth to mouth, but
for the most part they were very unsubstantial in all points save one,
and that possessed substance; not only lambs, but sheep, had
disappeared, and in the case of a miner and his wife, who lived some
distance off, and who had been away for a week to a wedding beyond the
mountains, they returned to their solitary cottage to find that it had
been entered in their absence, and completely stripped of everything
movable, even to the bed, while the very cabbages in the garden had been
torn up and carried away.

Mark had the news from the man himself, and he carried it to his father
and sister, as he had carried Dummy Rugg's rumour about the witches and
their fire, which went out so suddenly on being seen.

"Humph!" said Sir Edward, smiling; "that looks as if the witches liked
vegetables with their lamb and mutton.  Stripped the cottage, and took
the meal-tub too?"

"Everything, father," said Mark.

"Then it's time the men made a search, my boy," said Sir Edward; "we
must have a robber about.  There is the whole explanation of the old
women's tales.  Well, they will have to bestir themselves, and catch the
thief."

It was on that same morning that the news reached Cliff Castle, where
similar stories had floated about witches and warlocks having taken
possession of the shivering hills, where the slatey rocks were always
falling, and forming what the country people called screes, which, at a
distance, when wet and shiny, looked in the sunshine like cascades
descending from on high.

"If it comes to any of our sheep being taken, we shall have to take to a
hunt, Ralph," Sir Morton had said.  "The people like to have a witch or
two to curdle their blood, but I'm not going to find them in sheep."

It was a glorious morning, and the lad went into the courtyard with his
sister to have a look at her new fad, as Nick Garth called it, that is
to say, the well-plastered pool with its surrounding of rock-work, in
which various plants were beginning to flourish and reflect themselves
in the crystal water with which the little pond was filled.

"Capital!" cried Ralph; "but you ought to have a few fish in it.  They'd
look well."

"That is just what I wanted you to say, sir," cried Minnie, clapping her
hands; "and if you hadn't been such a solemn, serious brother, you would
have taken your rod and line, and caught me a few."

"Well, I will," said the lad eagerly; "and some for a fry as well.  The
little ones will be best for you, and I'll take a tin can for them, as
well as a creel."

An hour later, with a plentiful supply of caddis, caterpillars, and
other tempting bait, and rod in hand, Ralph descended to the side of the
stream.  He was not long in following suit with old Master Rayburn as to
his hose; and then stepping into the water, he began to wade upstream,
where it was shallow, going on to the bank where it grew deep.

But the day was too bright and the water too clear for his task.  The
fish saw him, and darted away, and when his keen eyes followed them to
their lair, they refused to be tempted out by any bait he threw.

"Just my luck when I come fishing," muttered Ralph, as he waded slowly
on, picking his way among the stones.  "There's always something wrong;
either it's too hot, or it's too cold, or there's too much water, or
there isn't enough, or the wind's somewhere in the wrong quarter, or I
haven't got the right bait; and so sure as I was to meet old Master
Rayburn, picking flowers on the bank, he'd say: `Ah, you should have
come yesterday, or last week, and then you'd have caught a fish at every
throw.'

"Stupid work, fishing," he said, half-aloud, when he had waded as far as
he could without getting wet, for the water had suddenly deepened and
curved round out of sight, all calm and still beneath the boughs shading
it on either side.  "Seems very easy, though, when you watch old
Rayburn.  He always knows where to throw."

For the moment, he was ready to give up, but feeling that his sister
would be disappointed if he went back empty-handed, he waded out, and
taking a short cut across the horseshoe formed by the stream, he reached
it again beyond the deeps, where it was possible to wade once more; and
before entering the bubbling waters, he stood looking upward, thinking
how beautiful it all was, with the flashing water gurgling and swirling
round the great stones which dotted the bed.  Every here and there the
sides were glowing with patches of the deep golden, yellow globe-flower;
a little farther on, there was a deeper spot with a patch of the great
glistening leaves of the water-lily, not yet in bloom; and as he stepped
down into the water, there was a flutter from a bird seated on a dead
twig, and a flash of azure light gleamed over the river, as the
disturbed kingfisher darted upstream, to be watched till it disappeared.

Flies danced up and down above the water, and every now and then one
dropped on the surface, with its wings closed, and sailed downward like
a tiny boat.  Bees swept by with a humming, slumberous sound; and among
the sedges at the sides, where the golden irises displayed their lovely
blossoms, the thin-bodied dragon-flies, steel-blue or green, darted on
transparent wing, pairs every now and then encountering fiercely with a
faint rustling of wings, and battling for a few seconds, when one would
dart away with the other in pursuit.

Ralph waded on, catching nothing; but the beauties of the place
increased, and satisfied him so that he began to forget his mission, and
paused now to listen to the soft coo of the wood-pigeon in the grove, to
the quick sharp _tah_! of the jackdaws sailing about high up, where they
nested in the bare face of the creviced cliffs.  Then on and on again,
in sunshine or in shade, for quite a couple of hours, fishing in a
desultory way, but with not the slightest result.  Then his luck turned.

He had been driven ashore several times by the deep water, but always
returned to the bed of the river where it shallowed, for it was easier
going than forcing his way amidst the stones, bushes, and trees at the
side; and now, as he was wading up toward where the water came over a
ridge in a cascade, a little shoal of half-a-dozen fish darted upward,
and he followed them, with the water growing more and more shallow, till
his pulses beat with satisfaction, for a little investigation showed him
that he would be able to drive the slippery prey right into a broad
stretch where the water was but an inch or two deep, and dotted
everywhere with shoals that were nearly dry.

Fishing was out of the question in a place like that, so twisting his
line round his rod, he used the latter as a walking-staff, and followed
till the prey he sought were compelled to flap themselves along upon
their sides; two trout on finding themselves in such straits leaping
right on to one of the half-dried pebbly shoals.  Here Ralph pounced
upon one after the other, and transferred them to his creel, after first
taking out his shoes and hose, which had been reclining there, at rest
from their ordinary avocation of protecting his feet.

"Queer fishing," muttered the lad; "but I've caught them.  Now for you."

This to the rest of the shoal, which he chased so perseveringly that he
caught four more by driving them into the shallowest water, the two
largest succeeding by desperate rushes in getting through the
treacherous part, and disappearing in the deeps toward the cascade.

"All too big to go in the little can," thought Ralph.  "Never mind; they
will make a fry.  Perhaps I can catch some smaller ones the same way."

He tied his shoes together by the strings, and fastened them to the
strap of his creel, tucked his hose through his belt, and went ashore
again, to make his way beyond the little cascade which fell musically
over the rocks; and as he was going on by the dammed-up deeps, there was
suddenly a rush among the sedges and rushes, followed by a splash, the
lad catching sight of a long, wet, brown body, as the animal made a
plunge and disappeared in deep water.

The next moment his eyes rested upon the remains of a feast, in the
shape of a fine trout, half-eaten, evidently quite freshly caught.

"Better fisherman than I am," said Ralph to himself, as he searched the
surface of the water to see if the otter he had disturbed would rise.
But the cunning animal had reached its hole in the bank, and was not
likely to return to its banquet: so Ralph went on beyond the deeps to
where the river ran shallow again beneath the overhanging trees, just
catching a glimpse at times of the great cliffs, whose tops often
resembled the ruins of neglected towers, so regularly were they laid in
fissured blocks.

Encouraged by his success, though conscious of the fact that it was the
work of a poacher more than an angler, Ralph was not long in finding a
suitable place for driving a few more fish.  Fate favoured him in this,
and in their being just of a suitable size for the little pool, and he
had just secured one about six inches long, and was filling his little
can with water, when he was startled by hearing a half-stifled bark
uttered, as if by a dog whose muzzle was being held.

He looked sharply round, and suddenly woke to the fact that, for how
long he could not tell, while he had been stalking the trout, he had
been stalked in turn.

For a man suddenly appeared among the bushes on the right, looked across
the river, and shouted, "Come on, now."

Three more appeared on the other side, one of whom leaped at once into
the river, while simultaneously a couple of dogs were let loose, and
dashed into the shallow water.

"Don't let him go back, lads," shouted the first man.  "Run him up: he
can't get away."

Ralph was equal to the occasion.  In a sharp glance round, while
snapping his rod in two where the butt was lashed to the thinner part,
he saw that his retreat was cut off down the river, and that his only
chance of escape was to go forward, right and left being sheer wall,
twenty feet on one side, two hundred, at least, on the other.  He
grasped, too, the fact that the men about to attack him were evidently
lead-miners, and the thought flashed upon him that he had inadvertently
come higher till, after a fashion, he was occupying Mark Eden's
position, trespassing upon an enemy's ground.

These thoughts were lightning-like, as he swung his rod-butt round, and
brought it down heavily upon a big mongrel dog that splashed through the
shallows, knocked it right over, to lie yelping and whining as it tore
up water and sand, the second dog contenting itself with yapping,
snarling, and making little charges, till a lucky blow caught it upon
the leg, and sent it howling back.

This was sufficient for the moment, and Ralph began to retreat, with the
men following him.

"There," shouted the one who seemed to be the leader.  "It's of no use,
so you may give in.  We know you, so come out, fish and all.  You
haven't no right up here."

Ralph made no reply, but flushing with anger and annoyance, he hurried
on over the shallows, with the men now in full pursuit, shouting, too,
at the dogs, and urging them to renew their attack.

"What an idiot I have been!" muttered the lad, as he splashed on,
wishing that he was on open ground, so that he could run; but wishing
was in vain.  He was unarmed, too, save for the stout ash-butt of his
spliced rod, and he knew that it would be impossible to defend himself
with that for long against four strong men, who were apparently only too
eager to get hold of the heir of the rival house, and drag him before
their lord.  For that they were Sir Edward Eden's men the lad had not a
doubt.

But Ralph had little time for thought; action was the thing, and he
splashed on, glancing from right to left to find a spot where he could
land and take to his heels--an impossibility there, for he soon saw that
his only chance was to climb, and that chance was small.

Then, as the men followed some forty yards behind, he saw the light of
hope.  Not far ahead, the water looked black and still, as it glided
through a narrow defile, shut in by the rocks.  That meant deep water;
but if he could reach that, he would have to swim, and the men probably
would not dare to follow.

Already the shallows were coming to an end, the water reaching to his
knees; and it was here that, encouraged and bullied into making a fresh
attack, the dogs overtook him once more, and half swimming, half making
leaps, they came at him, the bigger avoiding a blow, and seizing him by
the left, fortunately without hurt, the animal's teeth meeting only in
the padding of the short breeches of the period; but it held on,
growling, and shaking its head violently, while its companion, after a
deal of barking, dashed in on the right.

This time Ralph's aim was surer and quicker, the dog receiving a sharp
cut across the ear from the butt of the rod, and going down at once, to
begin howling, and swimming in a circle.

Rid thus of one enemy, the lad proceeded to get rid of the second by a
very simple plan.  Lowering his left hand, he got hold of the strap
which formed the dog's collar, and in spite of its struggles and
worryings, went on as fast as he could go--slowly enough, all the same--
to where the water deepened; and as it reached his thigh, he bent his
knees, with the natural result that as the dog held tenaciously to its
mouthful of cloth and padding, its head was beneath the water.

A few seconds were sufficient to make it quit its hold, and come up
choking and barking; but in obedience to the urging on of one of the
men, to pluckily renew the attack.

A sharp crack from the butt knocked all the remaining courage out of its
head, and it turned, howling, to swim back toward its masters.

"Here, it's no good, young Darley," yelled one of the men.  "You may
give up now.  We've got you fast."

"And it'll be the worst for you, if you don't.  We have got you now."

"Hold me tight, then," muttered the lad, with a triumphant feeling at
his chances of escape beginning to make him glow.

"You mustn't go there," shouted another.  "It's woundy deep, and you'll
get sucked down."

"Come and be sucked down after me," muttered Ralph, as the dogs began
barking again furiously, but refused to follow and attack, keeping close
to the men, who were all now in the river, wading slowly, the walls
having grown too precipitous for them to keep on the sides.

Ralph's progress was slow enough too, for the water had deepened till it
was above his waist, and the next minute was nearly to his armpits,
while the river having narrowed now to half its width, the stream though
deep came faster, and grew harder to stem.

"D'you hear, youngster!" roared the leader.  "You'll be drownded."

"Better that than be caught and dragged up to the Black Tor for that
wretched boor, Mark Eden, to triumph over me," thought Ralph; and he
pushed boldly on, forced his way a dozen yards, and then made a step, to
find no bottom, and going down over his head.

"Told you so," rang in his ears, as he struck out and rose, to find
himself being borne back; but a few strokes took him to the right side,
where he snatched at some overhanging ferns rooted in the perpendicular
wall of rock, checked himself for a few moments, and looked back, to see
the four men, nearly breast-deep, a dozen yards behind, waiting for him
to be swept down to their grasp.

"There, give up!" cried another, "for you're drownded.  You don't know
the waters here, like we do.  Some o' that goes right down into the
mine."

To the astonishment of the men, who did not dare to venture farther, the
lad did not surrender, but looked sharply about to try and fully grasp
his position and his chances of escape.  Ahead the water certainly
appeared deeper, for it glided on towards him, looking black, oily, and
marked with sinuous lines.  There was no ripple to indicate a shallow,
and he could feel, from the pressure against him, that it would be
impossible to stem it in swimming; while most ominous of all, right in
the centre, a little way ahead, there was a spot where the water was a
little depressed.  It kept circling round every now and then, forming a
funnel-shaped opening about a foot across, showing plainly enough that
the men were right, and that a portion of the stream passed down there
into some hole in the rock, to form one of the subterranean courses of
which there were several in the district, as he knew both where rivulets
disappeared, and also suddenly gushed out into the light of day.

Ralph grasped then at once that it would be impossible to escape by
swimming against such a stream; that if he could have done so, there was
the horrible risk of being sucked down into some awful chasm to instant
death; that he could not climb up the wall of rock where he hung on
then; and that, if he let go, he would be borne along in a few moments
to the men's hands; and then, that he would be bound, and dragged away a
prisoner, to his shame, and all through trying to get those unfortunate
fish.

"It's of no use," he muttered despairingly, as he looked above him
again, and, as he did so, saw that the men were laughing at his
predicament, for, as Touchstone the clown told the shepherd, he was "in
a parlous case."

But hope is a fine thing, and gives us rays of light even in the darkest
places.  Just when Ralph felt most despondent, it occurred to him that
there was another way out of the difficulty, and he proceeded to put it
in force by looking straight ahead, along the wall of rock, which ran
down into the water, and there, just beyond the tuft by which he held
on, and certainly within reach, was one of the perpendicular cracks
which divided the stone into blocks.  In an instant he had stretched out
his left hand, forced it in there, drawn himself along till he could get
the other hand in, and was safe so far; and to his great joy found, by a
little searching, that he could find foot-hold, for the horizontal crack
ran some four feet below the surface, and afforded him sufficient
standing room, if he could only find something to hold on by above.

For the moment he was safe, but his object was to get along the wall,
till he could find a place where he could climb the rocky side of the
river; and once clear of the water, he felt that it would go hard if he
could not find some way to the top, the more easily from the fact that
above the steep piece of wall down into the water the trees grew so
abundantly that a climber would for a certainty find plenty of help.

The men remained motionless in the water, watching in the full
expectation of seeing the lad swept down to them; but he held fast, and
once more reaching forward, he strained outward till he caught a tuft of
grass, crept on along the submerged ledge to that, and from there gained
a large patch of tough broom.  Then came two or three easy movements
onward, bringing the fugitive abreast of the sink, which was larger than
it had appeared from below, and Ralph shuddered as he felt that any one
who approached the vortex would for a certainty be dragged down.

For a few moments he clung there, the nervous thoughts of what might be
if he slipped and were caught in the whirlpool being sufficient to half
paralyse him; then turning angry at his feeling of cowardice, he reached
boldly out again, found fresh hand-hold, and did the same again and
again, till he was a dozen yards beyond the sink-hole, and had to stop
and think.  For the wall was smoother than ever; the stream ran
stronger; the distance between the two sides being less, it looked
deeper; and the next place where he could find hand-hold was apparently
too far to reach.

Still, it was his only chance, and taking fast hold with his right, and
somehow thinking the while of Mark's passage along the surface of the
High Cliff, he reached out farther and farther, pressing his breast
against the rock, edging his feet along, and then stopping at his
fullest stretch, to find the little root of ivy he aimed at grasping
still six or seven inches away.

The dead silence preserved by the men below was broken by the barking of
one of the dogs.  Then all was still again, and Ralph felt that his only
chance was to steady himself for a moment with his feet, loosen his hold
with his right hand, and let himself glide along the face of the rock
forward till his left touched the ivy, and then hold on.

If he missed catching hold--?

"I mustn't think of such a thing," he muttered; and he at once put his
plan into action, letting himself glide forward.

As a scholar, fresh from a big school, he ought to have been more
mathematically correct, and known that in describing the arc of a circle
his left hand would go lower; but he did not stop to think.  The
consequence was that as his fingers glided over the rough stone, they
passed a few inches beneath the tough stem he sought to grasp, and once
in motion, he could not stop himself.  He clutched at the stone with his
right hand, and his nails scratched over it, as he vainly strove to find
a prominence or crevice to check him; but all in vain; the pressure of
the running water on the lower part of his body helped to destroy his
balance, and with a faint cry, he went headlong into the gliding stream,
the men simultaneously giving vent to a yell, half of horror, half of
satisfaction.

"The sink-hole!  Shall I be sucked down?" was the thought that flashed
across the lad's brain, like a lurid light, as he went under; then he
struck out vigorously for the side, and as he rose to the surface saw
that he was being drawn toward the hole where it gaped horribly, and
closed, and gaped again, a few yards away.

If any boy who reads this cannot swim, let him feel that he is sinning
against himself, and neglecting a great duty, till he can plunge without
a trace of nervousness into deep water, and make his way upon the
surface easily and well.  Fortunately for Ralph Darley, he was quite at
home in the water, and the strong firm strokes he took were sufficient
to carry him well in toward the side, so that he passed the little
whirlpool where its force was weakest; and as the men below closed
together, and waded a couple of steps to meet him, they had the
mortification of seeing him clinging to the wall of rock, half-a-dozen
yards above them, and then creeping forward again, step by step, till he
reached the point from which he had been swept, and held on there once
more.

Here, as they watched him curiously, they saw that he remained
motionless, as if thinking what to do next, as was the case; and coming
to the conclusion that he must manage somehow to grasp that tuft of ivy,
he tried again, with the dread of the consequences the less from the
experience he had gone through.

Coming to the conclusion that the only way was to raise himself upon his
toes at the last moment, and jerk himself forward, he drew in a deep
breath, reached out to the utmost, but raised his left hand more, then
loosened his grasp with his right, and when he thought the moment had
come, gave a slight bound.

That did it.  He caught at the ivy, his fingers closed upon it tightly,
and he tried hard to keep his feet upon the ledge below water.  But this
effort failed, his balance was gone, his feet glided from the ledge, and
he swung round, holding on to the ivy, which seemed to be giving way at
its roots.

But as Ralph fell, his hand slipped quite a foot down the ivy, and the
water took a good deal of his weight, so that, though the strain upon
the feeble growth was great, it remained firm enough to hold him; and he
hung half in, half out of the water for some time, afraid to stir, but
all the time energetically using his eyes, to seek for a way out of his
perilous position.

He was not long in coming to a decision.  Above the ivy there was one of
the cracks, and he saw that if he could reach that, he could climb to
the one above, and from there gain the roots of a gnarled hawthorn,
whose seed had been dropped in a fissure by a bird generations back, the
dryness of the position and want of root-food keeping the tree stunted
and dwarfed.  Once up there, another ten or twelve feet would take him
to the top of the lower wall, and then he felt that it would go hard if
he could not climb and hide, or escape up the cliff; so he set to at
once to try.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

RALPH GETS TIT FOR TAT.

Ralph Darley's first step was to get his right hand beside his left, and
his feet once more upon the ledge, but the ivy gave way a little more at
this movement, and he paused.  But not for long.  Another danger was at
hand.

Moved by the boldness of the lad's efforts to escape, and in dread lest
he might be successful, the leader of the four men, after a short
consultation with the others, who tried to dissuade him, began to wade
cautiously forward till the water grew too deep for him, and then
creeping sidewise, he climbed on to the smooth wall, and began to
imitate the course taken by Ralph; but before he had gone many yards,
one of his companions shouted:

"You'll go down, and be swep' away, and sucked in."

This checked him and made him hesitate, but rousing his courage again,
he once more began to edge along the shelf below the surface, and this
spurred the fugitive on to make another effort.

This time he caught at the ivy, which gave way a little more, but still
held, and by moving cautiously, Ralph managed to get his feet upon the
ledge.  The next minute he had found another prominence below water,
raised his foot to it, and caught at a rough bit of the stone above the
ivy, stood firm, drew himself a little higher, and by a quick scramble,
got a foot now on the ivy stem and his hands in the crack above, just as
the growth yielded to his foot, dropped into the stream, and was swept
away, leaving the lad hanging by his cramped fingers.

But though the ivy was gone, the crevice in which it had grown remained,
and in another few seconds Ralph's toes were in it, and the weight off
his hands.

He rested, and looked down-stream, to see that the man was steadily
approaching, but the lad felt safe now.  The ivy was gone, and the enemy
could not possibly get farther along the ledge than the spot from whence
he had slipped.

Cheered by this, Ralph began to climb again, finding the task easier,
and the next minute he had hold of the tough stem of the hawthorn; and
heedless of the thorns, dragged himself up into it, stood upright,
reached another good, strong hand-hold, and then stepped right up on to
a broad shelf of grass-grown limestone.  The men uttered a fierce shout,
and their leader, seeing now that his task was hopeless, began to retire
and join his companions.

Ralph watched him for a few moments, and then began to climb again,
finding this part of the slope easy, for great pieces of stone were
piled up, and made fast by the bushes which grew amongst them, hiding
the fugitive from the sight of those below, and raising his hopes as he
found how easily he could get up.  Twice over he heard shouts and their
echoes from the opposite side, but he was too busy to heed them, and
soon felt confident enough to sit down in a niche, half-way up the
cliff, and rest for a few minutes.

"Horribly wet," he said to himself; "fishing-rod broken and lost,
fish-can gone, and--ah!  I did not expect that," for he found that
shoes, hose, and creel were safe.  "Glad I shall take the fish home
after all."

He listened: all was still.  Then he peered down, but he could see
nothing save the bushes and trees on the other side; even the river was
invisible from where he sat; and getting his breath now after his
exertions, he turned, and began to look upward.

Ralph was born somewhere about three miles from where he sat, but he had
inadvertently wandered into a part that was perfectly unfamiliar to him,
the feud between the two families having resulted in its being
considered dangerous for either side to intrude within the portion of
the rugged mountainous land belonging to the other.

Still, the lad had some notion of the bearings of the cliff hills from
seeing them at a distance, and he rapidly came to a conclusion as to
which would be the best course for him to take to avoid the occupants of
the Black Tor; but when any one is flurried he is liable to make
mistakes, and much more likely when deep in a tangle of pathless wood,
and listening for the steps of those who are seeking to make him a
prisoner.

According to Ralph's calculations, the narrow gap which led eastward to
the edge of the huge hollow in which the narrow, roughly conical mass of
limestone rose crowned with the Eden Castle, lay away to his left; and
as he had in climbing kept on bearing to the right, he was perfectly
certain that he had passed right over the men in the river.  He felt,
therefore, that he had nothing to do but keep steadily on in the same
course, always mounting higher at every opportunity of doing so unseen,
until close to the top, when he could keep along the edge unseen till
well on his way homeward, and then take to the open downs above.

The silence below was encouraging, and in spite of being compelled often
to creep beneath the bushes, and here and there descend to avoid some
perpendicular piece of rock, he got on, so that he grew more and more
satisfied that he had escaped, and had nothing to do but persevere, and
be well out of what had promised to be a very awkward predicament.  His
clothes clung to his back, and his legs were terribly scratched, while
one of his feet was bleeding; but that was a trifle which he hardly
regarded.

Just before him was a steeper bit than usual, and he hesitated about
trying to climb it; but the way up or down seemed to promise no better,
so taking advantage of the dense cover afforded by the trees, he
steadily attacked the awkward precipice, the dwarf trees helped him with
their gnarled trunks, and he mastered the ascent, found himself higher
up than he had expected, crawled a step or two farther, and arrived the
next minute at the brink of a deep chasm, while to the left, not a
couple of hundred yards away, rose the castle-crowned Black Tor.

He shrank back the next instant, and a feeling of confusion came over
him.  He could hardly understand how it was, but directly after it was
forced upon his understanding that he had been quite wrong in his
bearings; that when he began to climb, the Black Tor lay to his right
instead of his left, and that, instead of going into safety, he had been
making straight for the most dangerous place.

To go on was impossible, for the cliff beneath him was overhanging; to
go to the left was equally vain; and to descend or return was in all
probability to walk right into the arms of his pursuers.

Once more he cautiously advanced his head between the bushes to look
out, but the prospect was not encouraging.  There, fifty or sixty feet
away, was the fellow cliff to that upon which he lay, split apart by
some terrible convulsion of nature; and once there he could have made
for home, but there was no way of passing the opening save by descending
right to the river's bank, and he felt pretty certain that he could not
do this without being seen.

Still it was the only course, and his choice was open to him--to lie in
hiding till the darkness came, many hours later, or boldly descend.

To lie there in the shadow with his wet clothes clinging to him was not
a pleasant prospect, but it seemed the only one feasible under the
circumstances; and he concluded that this was what he would do, wishing
the while that he dared go and lie right out in the sunshine.

He had hardly thought this, when a hot thrill ran through him, for from
somewhere below there came the sharp bark of a dog, and a voice rose
cheering the animal on, and then shouted: "Close in, all of you: he's up
here somewhere.  Dog's got his scent."

Then voices answered with hails from different parts, and Ralph's next
movement was to crawl forward again to the very edge of the precipice,
look over, and seek for a place where he might perhaps descend.

But again he saw that it was utterly hopeless, and nerved now by his
despair, he began to descend through the fringe of scrub oak and beech,
close to the chasm, so as to get down to the river, where he meant to
plunge in, and cross by wading or swimming to the other side.

But there is no hiding from the scent of a dog.  Ralph had not gone down
half-a-dozen yards before the dog gave tongue again, and kept on
barking, coming nearer and nearer, and more rapidly as the scent grew
hotter: while before another dozen yards were passed the lad had to
seize the first block of stone he could lift, and turn at bay, for the
dog had sighted him and rushed forward, as if to leap at his throat.

There is many a dog, though--perhaps taught by experience--that will
face a staff, but shrink in the most timid manner from a stone; and it
was so here.  At the first threatening movement made by Ralph, the dog
stopped short, barking furiously, and the lad glanced downward once
more.  But to proceed meant to turn his back upon his four-footed enemy,
which would have seized him directly.

There was nothing then to be done but face it, and he prepared to hurl
his missile, but, to the lad's despair, the second dog, which had been
silent, now rushed up, and he had to keep them both off as he stood at
bay, the new-comer being more viciously aggressive than the first.

"I can't help it: I must make a dash for freedom," thought Ralph; and,
raising his stone higher, he hurled it at the bigger dog, which avoided
it by bounding aside.  Then turning, he dashed downward, right into the
arms of a man.

There was a sharp struggle, and the latter was getting worsted, being
lower down, and having to bear the shock of Ralph's weight in the bound,
but the next moment unexpectedly the lad felt himself seized from
behind, two more men came panting up, and, utterly mastered, he found
himself upon his back, with one enemy seated upon his chest, another
holding his arms outspread, and the others his legs, thoroughly
spread-eagled upon the sloping rock.

"Got you now," said the leader of the little party.  "You, Tom, we can
manage him.--Get out, will you, dogs!--Here, take them with you.  Run to
the mine hut, and get some rope to tie him.  Be as smart as you can.
The master'll give us something decent for a job like this."

The man addressed called the dogs to him, and was unwillingly obeyed,
but a few stones thrown by the rest overcame the animals' objections,
and they trotted off, leaving the prisoner relapsed into a sulky
silence; his captors chatted pleasantly together about his fate,
banteringly telling him that for certain he would be hung over the
castle wall.

Ralph paid no heed to what was said, and after a time the men grew tired
of their banter, and began to wonder among themselves whether their
companion would say anything to those whom he might meet.

"He'll like enough be doing it," said the leader.  "I tilled him to
fetch a rope, and if he does anything else, he'll hear of it from me.
What we wants is to take our prisoner up proper to the master, and get
our reward."

Then they began muttering in a low voice among themselves, taking care
that their prisoner should not hear, as he lay upon his back, staring
straight up at the blue sky, and thinking of how soon it had come upon
him to be suffering Mark Eden's reverse.

At last a hail came from below, and the man panted breathlessly up to
them, throwing down a coil of thin rope, with which, after turning him
over upon his face, the men, in spite of his struggles, tightly and
cruelly tied their prisoner's arms behind him, and then his ankles and
knees.  They were about to lift him up, when there was a sharp barking
heard again.

"Here, you, Tom," cried the leader, who had been most savage in dragging
the knots as tightly as possible, "I told you to take those dogs back."

"Well, so I did.  I didn't bring 'em."

"They've come all the same," cried the other.  "Well, it don't matter
now.  Perhaps Buzz wants a taste of these here naked legs."

The dog barked close at hand now.

"Here, you, jump up, before he has you," cried the leader brutally; and
then he stared wonderingly, for there was a sharp rustling amongst the
bushes, and the dog sprang out to them, closely followed by Mark Eden,
who cried in wonder:

"Why, hallo: then this is what Buzz meant!  Whom have you got there?"

The men drew back, and Mark stooped, as the dog barked violently, turned
the prisoner over, and once more the two enemies were gazing curiously
in each other's eyes.

Ralph did not flinch, but a dull feeling of despair ran through him as
he saw Mark Eden's face light up, his eyes flashing, and a smile of
triumph playing about his lips.

Mark did not speak for a time.  Then he turned his back upon the
prisoner.

"Do you know who this is?" he said to the men.

"Oh yes, Master Mark, we know him.  Don't you?  It's young Darley, from
below there.  We was having a bit of a ramble 'fore going down in the
mine, and we'd got the dogs, to see if there was any chance of a rabbit
pie for supper; but they didn't find one; they found his nabbs here
instead.  We had to hold the dogs' muzzles to keep 'em quiet till he'd
got by."

"What was he doing?"

"Wading, and ketching our trout.  We let him go right up to the deep
water, down below where the narrows are, and we thought we'd trapped
him; but somehow he managed to scramble up the side and get up here, so
we set the dogs on, and they run him down.  Look here, Master Mark; he'd
got all these trout.  Fine 'uns too."

The man opened Ralph's creel, and held it out for Mark to see, the lad
nodding at the sight.

"Know'd where the good uns was."

"And what were you going to do with him?" said Mark quietly.

"We had to ketch him first," said the man, with a savagely stupid grin.
"And he give us a lot o' trouble, and we thought best thing to do was to
tie a stone to his neck and pitch him in one of the holes.  But Tom,
here, said the master wouldn't like it, and seeing he was a Darley,
might like to make a sample of him, or keep him down in the mine to
work.  So we tied him tight, and was going to swing him between us, and
carry him up to the gateway for the master to see.  Then you come."

Mark made no sign of either satisfaction or anger, but stood thinking
for a minute or so, before turning again to where Ralph lay gazing
straight up to the sky, waiting for whatever fate might be his, and
setting his teeth hard in the firm determination to die sooner than ask
for mercy from the cruel young savage who stood before him with what
seemed to be a malicious grin upon his face.

And as he lay, Ralph thought of his school life, and all that had passed
there, and how strange it was that in the wild part of Midland England
there, amongst the mountains of the Peak, people could still be so
savage as to be able to follow their own wills to as great an extent as
did the barons and feudal chiefs of a couple of hundred years before.

Such thoughts as these had never come to him till after he had left home
for school, to find his level.  Earlier in his boyhood his father had
appeared to him to be chief or king of the district, with a neighbour
who was a rival chief or king.  He knew that King James ruled the land;
but that was England, away from the Peak.  There, Sir Morton Darley,
knight, was head of all, and the laws of England did not seem to apply
anywhere there.  Then he had gradually grown more enlightened, and never
more so than at the present moment, as he lay bound on the mossy stones,
feeling that unless his father came with a strong enough force to rescue
him, his fate might even be death.  And the result?  Would the law
punish the Edens for the deed?  He felt that they would go free.  They
were to a pretty good extent outlaws, and the deed would never be known
beyond their district.  The moors and mountains shut them in.  But Sir
Morton, Ralph felt, would never sit down quietly.  He would for certain
attack and try to punish the Edens, and the feud would grow more deadly
than ever.

Thoughts like these ran through his brain as he lay there, till the
silence was broken by Mark Eden, whose face plainly told of the supreme
pleasure he felt in seeing his young enemy humbled thus before him.

"Well," he said at last, "are you not going to beg to be set at
liberty?"

Ralph looked at him defiantly.

"No," he said.

"Want to be taken up to the Tor, and hung from the tower as a scarecrow
to keep away all the other thieves?"

"What is it to you?" replied Ralph bitterly.

"You came and took our trout," said Mark, with a sneer; and he raised
his foot as if tempted to plant it upon the prisoner's chest.

"Yes, I came and caught some trout: but I looked upon the river as free
to me, as you thought our cliff was free to you."

"Hah!" cried Mark triumphantly; "I knew you would begin to beg for your
life."

"I have not begged," said Ralph coldly.  "You spoke to me and I
answered."

"Ropes hurt?" said Mark, after a pause, during which he could find
nothing else to say.

Ralph smiled.

"Look for yourself," he said.  "They don't quite cut to the bone."

"Our mine lads are strong," said Mark proudly.  "Strong enough to beat
your wretched set of servants if ever they dare come up here."

"So brave and strong that you are glad to hire a gang of ruffianly
soldiers to help you," said Ralph scornfully.

"What?  Those fellows in rags and rust?  Pooh!  We would not have them."

Ralph opened his eyes a little wider.

"The Edens want no paid help of that kind.  We're strong enough to come
and take your place whenever we like; but as you won't be there, it will
not matter to you."

"No," said Ralph, who was sick with pain, and faint from the throbbing
caused by his bonds.

"But it would be a pity for my father to have you hung as a scarecrow,"
said Mark mockingly.  "I don't like to see such things about.  What do
you say to going down to work always in our lead-mine?"

"Nothing," said Ralph coldly.

"Better to live in the dark there, on bread and water, than to be
killed."

Ralph made no reply, but gazed fixedly in the speaker's eyes.

"Better beg for your life, boy," said Mark, placing his foot now on the
prisoner's chest.

"What! of you?" cried Ralph.

"Yes: I might make you my lackey, to wait upon me.  That is what the
Darleys should do for the Edens."

"You coward!" said Ralph, with his pale face flushing now.

"What!" cried Mark.  "Oh yes, call names like a girl.  Come: beg for
your life."

Ralph's answer was a fierce and scornful look, which told of what he
would do if his hands were free.  Then for a few moments he struggled,
and Mark laughed.

"No good," he said; "our men can tie knots fast enough to hold a
Darley."

The men, who stood at a little distance, laughed together in their
satisfaction as they eagerly waited to see what was to come.  Mark did
not keep them long in suspense, for his hand went to the hilt of his
sword, which he half drew.

"Now," he said, "beg for your life, Darley."

"Coward!" cried Ralph, in a hoarse whisper.

"Very well," said Mark.  "I gave you the chance.  You were caught by our
men stealing on our land, and you ought to have begged.  The Darleys
always were beggars and thieves; but you will not.  I gave you the
opportunity."

He thrust the sword back in its sheath, and let his right hand fall to
his side, where a strong knife-like dagger hung by a short chain from
his belt, and whipped it out of its case.

"Does for a hunting-knife," he said, with a curious laugh.  "My father
has killed many a stag with it.  Now, are you going to beg for your
life?"

There was no reply, and the men took a step or two forward.

"Go back!" cried Mark fiercely; and the men obeyed.

Mark bent over the prisoner, with the mocking laugh intensifying.

"Too much of a coward to beg for your life," he said: "well, I'm too
much of a coward to make you see it taken.  There!"

With a quick movement, he turned Ralph over upon his face, thrust the
point of the dagger beneath the line where the cut would tell best, and
the prisoner's wrists were free; another quick cut divided the rope
which drew his elbows together, and then the knees and ankles followed,
the strained hemp easily parting at the touch of the keen blade, and
Ralph Darley was free.

"Why, Master Mark," cried the chief man of the party in astonishment,
"what you doing of?"

"Can't you see, idiot?" cried Mark, with a fierce snap.

"But what's the good of our ketching and tying on him?" cried the man
addressed as Tom, in an ill-used tone.

"Say another word, you brute, and I'll have you tied as you tied him,"
cried Mark fiercely.

"Well, I dunno what Sir Eddard'll say when he knows."

"What he says he'll say to me," cried Mark.  "You fellows ought to be in
the mine by now.  Go back to your work."

The youth stood pointing down the steep slope, and an angry murmur of
opposition arose; but the men began to move off, only to be called back
just as Ralph rose painfully to his feet.

"Come here," cried Mark.  "Pick up those pieces of rope."

"Who's going to take them back to the mine?" said the leader, in an
ill-used tone.  "What's Dan Rugg going to say?  Noo rope too."

"Tell him I cut it," said Mark imperiously.  "You take it back."

The man picked up the pieces, and Tom quietly took up the creel from
where it lay, half hidden by a tuft of fern fronds, to begin moving off
with the trout.  But Mark let him get a few steps away before following
with a rush and a kick which sent the man on his face.  Then, as he
struggled up, angry and threatening, the lad snatched the creel from his
hands.

"The Edens are not thieves," he said fiercely--"only when they want a
few young ravens," he added, turning with a mocking laugh to Ralph; and
once more the two lads stood gazing in each other's eyes for a few
moments, the rustling made by the departing men and the murmur of their
voices rising from below.

Then, imitating Ralph's action of the last time they met, he pointed
down to the river, and said, with a mocking laugh:

"It's my turn now.  The Darleys are not the only ones who know how to
treat a fallen enemy.  Your creel, sir; and you are welcome to our
trout."

Ralph took the basket without a word, and without taking his eyes from
Mark's, while it seemed as if each lad was fighting hard not to be the
first to let his glance sink before the other's.

Then Ralph raised the lid of the creel, and began to take out the fish,
but hesitated, and laid them back.  To have thrown them on the ground
seemed to him contemptible and mean.

"Now go," said Mark.  "You and I are straight, sir.  Next time we meet I
hope you will wear your sword."

Ralph hesitated, and remained standing in the same place; his eyes
looking as if he wanted to speak, but no words would come; and at last
he turned and took a step to go, but his numbed feet and ankles gave way
beneath him, and he tottered, and would have fallen, had not Mark
involuntarily sprung forward and caught him in his arms.

Ralph laughed painfully.

"Let me sit down on the enemy's ground for a few minutes," he said.
"Your men have left me no use in my limbs."

Mark gently let him down; and, faint with pain, the cold sweat breaking
out in great drops all over his brow, Ralph said feebly, smiling the
while:

"Not straight yet, Master Eden.  I am in your debt now."

Then a deathly feeling of sickness came over him; trees, rocks, and
sunny sky were dim, and glided before his eyes till all was darkness,
for how long he could not tell.

When he opened his eyes again the sickly feeling still troubled him, but
he could not understand why.  It was like awakening from some troubled
dream, and full consciousness came back slowly.  Then, by degrees, he
grasped the fact that his head was resting on a tuft of heath, and
bracken fronds shaded him from the sun.  His wrists throbbed with
sharp-shooting pains, which ran right up beyond his elbows.  There were
pains, too, about his knees and ankles, and there was something else
which he could not make out, till he looked towards his feet, to see
that some one was seated a little below him on the sharp slope, with
back half-turned to him, and his bare legs across his lap, chafing the
ankles gently, first one and then the other, over and over again.

Ralph was quite conscious now, but he did not speak.  He lay back there,
making no movement, no sign; but a curiously dark look came into his
eyes, and his lips quivered a little, grew firm again, and were softened
by a smile, while a strange glowing sensation set in about his heart.

Five minutes must have elapsed before Mark Eden turned his head, started
as he saw that Ralph's eyes were watching him, and his quiet intent gaze
gave place to a frown; his face became scarlet, and he hastily placed
his patient's legs upon the ground.

"How long have you been watching me?" he said hotly.

"Only a minute or so.  Did I faint?"

"I suppose so," said Mark roughly.  "Just like a great girl."

"Yes: very weak of me," said Ralph quietly.

"Yes, very," said Mark.  "The brutes tied you too tightly.  Try if you
can walk now.  Get down by the river, and bathe them a bit."

He stood up and thrust his hands behind him, looking at his young enemy
scornfully; but the scarlet flush was in his face still, and would make
him look as if he were ashamed of what he had been caught doing.

Ralph sat up, and struggled painfully to his feet, turning hot and faint
again; but he made a brave effort to be firm, and took a step or two and
then stopped, Mark making no effort to assist him.  Then stifling a cry
of pain, he took another step or two and tottered, when Mark caught his
arm.

"You're shamming," he cried angrily.

Ralph's brow wrinkled, and he looked down at his bare legs and feet,
raising one a little, painfully, to draw attention to the terribly
swollen state of his ankles and knees.

"Shamming!" he said quietly.  "Am I?  Well, they are not."

Ralph held out first one leg, and then the other, before seating himself
again, drawing his hose from his belt, and trying to draw them on; but
at the end of a minute the pain from his swollen wrists forced him to
give up the task, and he slowly replaced the hose in his belt.

Twice over, unseen by Ralph, his companion made a gesture as if to
advance and help him, but he mastered the inclination; and after a
while, Ralph sat perfectly still, waiting for the giddy feeling from
which he suffered to go off.  And at last, feeling a little better, he
rose to his feet, bowed distantly, and began to descend the steep slope;
but in a few minutes he was clinging to a tree, helpless once more, and
he started, as Mark suddenly said, roughly:

"Here; you don't know our cliff: let me show you--"

Ralph was under the impression that he had left Mark Eden quite behind,
and his surprise was the greater when he found that his enemy was
offering him his arm, and ended by helping him down the remainder of the
way to the river, where the injured lad gladly seated himself at the
edge upon a stone, which enabled him to lave both feet at once in the
clear cool current, to the great comfort and relief of his swollen
ankles.

After a time he was able to use his feet, resume his hose and shoes, and
rise to start back; but it was awkward to part without some word of
thanks, and these were very difficult to say to one who stood by all the
time, watching every action, with a mocking smile upon his lips.

But the words had to be said, and making an effort Ralph turned to
speak.  But before a sound had left his lips, Mark burst out with:

"Going now?  Very well.  Wait till we meet again.  That way, sir.  I
dare say you know that you can cross the river there?"

Ralph bowed coldly, and took a few steps toward the shallows, before
stopping short.

"I must go and thank him for what he has done," he said to himself; and
he turned to walk back, but Mark was not visible.

"Master Mark Eden," he cried; but there was no reply, and he cried
again, shouting as loud as he could, but there was still no response.
And, sick at heart with pain and vexation, Ralph once more stumbled
awkwardly along by the river, amongst stone, bramble, and fern, trying
to make out where the deep chasm was down into which he had looked, but
it was completely hidden by the trees; and, reaching the shallows, he
slowly crossed to go homeward on the more open side, which was a far
less difficult task, though it necessitated crossing the river again.

But as the lad disappeared among the trees, Mark Eden rose from where he
had been hidden behind a pile of fallen blocks, to make his way into the
chasm, and then upward to the castle on the Black Tor, frowning very
fiercely, and feeling a good deal dissatisfied with himself, though
brightening up a little as he began thinking of what was to happen the
next time he and Ralph Darley met.

"One couldn't do anything," he said roughly, "till that old business had
been put straight."



CHAPTER TWELVE.

BARING THE WHITE BLADE.

Ralph Darley's disposition led him to determine to say nothing about
what had passed, but his lame legs forced him to confess how it was his
ankles were so bad, and Sir Morton was furious.  He was ready to declare
war on a small scale against his neighbour, and carry fire and sword
into his camp.  But Ralph's legs were better the next day; and when the
whole history of the two encounters had been gone over, he thought
better of the affair, to the extent of determining to wait till his son
was quite well again; and when he was quite well, there were other
things to dwell upon.

For one, Nick Garth, who had been across to one of the villages beyond
the moor, came back with his head bleeding, and stripped to breeches and
shirt.

His account of his trouble was that he was coming home in the dark,
keeping one eye upon a flickering light some distance away up the
mountain-side.  Sometimes it was visible, at others all was black; and
he was wondering whether it had anything to do with the witches' fire of
which he had heard tell, when all at once he found himself surrounded by
seven or eight wild-looking figures, either in long gowns or cloaks, who
seized him; and upon his resisting wildly, they knocked him down, took
the best of his clothes away, emptied his pockets, and departed,
carrying off a large basket he was taking home, a basket containing two
chickens, two ducklings, and a big pat of butter, the present of a
married sister beyond the moors.

The next day news reached the Black Tor that the witches had been seen
again by two different miners, and in each case the tale was the same.

The witches were crowding together in a huddled way, in their long
cloaks, over a fire.  A caldron was hung from three sticks, joined
together at the top, and one of the men declared that they must have
been busy over some unhallowed work.

"Why do you say that, man?" asked Mark.

"Because they were chanting some horrible thing together."

"You heard that?"

"Ay, Master Mark, I heered it."

"A song?"

"Song, Master Mark?  Save us, no!  A song makes your eyes water if it's
about solemn things, or it makes you laugh if it's comic; but this made
the marrow in my bones turn hard as taller, for it went through me; and
as I watched them, they all got up and joined hands, and began to walk
slowly round the great pot over the fire, and the light shone on their
horrible faces and long ragged gowns.  I wanted to run away, but my legs
was all of a tremble.  I'd ha' give anything to run, but they legs
wouldn't go, and there I stood, watching 'em as they danced round the
fire a little faster, and a little faster, till they were racing about,
singing and screeching.  And then all at once they stopped and shouted
`Wow?' all together, and burst into the most horrid shrecking laughter
you ever heered, and the light went out.  That seemed to set my legs
going, master, and I turned to get away as fast as ever I could go, when
I heered some kind o' wild bird whistle over the mountain-side, and
another answered it close to me: and before I knew where I was, the
great bird fluttered its wings over me, and I caught my foot in a tuft
of heather, and fell."

"Well, and what then?" asked Mark.

"Nothing, sir, only that I ran all the way home to my cottage yonder,
and you ask my wife, and she'll tell you I hadn't a dry thread on me
when I got in.  Now, sir, what do you say?"

"All nonsense!" replied Mark bluntly, and he walked away.

Another few days passed.  Mark had been very quiet and thoughtful at
home, reading, or making believe to read, and spending a good deal of
time in the mine with Dummy Rugg, who twice over proposed that they
should go on exploring the grotto-like place he had discovered; but to
his surprise, his young master put it off, and the quiet, silent fellow
waited.  He, though, had more tales to tell of the way in which things
disappeared from cottages.  Pigs, sheep, poultry went in the most
unaccountable way, and the witches who met sometimes on the mountain
slope had the credit of spiriting them away.

"Then why don't the people who lose things follow the witches up, and
see if they have taken them?"

"Follow 'em up, sir?" said Dummy, opening his eyes very widely.  "They
wouldn't dare."

Then came a day when, feeling dull and bitter and as if he were not
enjoying himself at home, as he did the last time he was there, Mark
mounted one of the stout cob ponies kept for his and his sister's use,
and went for a good long round, one which was prolonged so that it was
getting toward evening, and the sun was peering over the shoulder of one
of the western hills, when, throwing the rein on his cob's neck, and
leaving it to pick its own way among the stones of the moorland, he
entered a narrow, waste-looking dale, about four miles from the Tor.

He felt more dull and low-spirited than when he started in the morning,
probably from want of a good meal, for he had had nothing since
breakfast, save a hunch of very cake-like bread and a bowl of milk at a
cottage farm right up in the Peak, where he had rested his pony while it
had a good feed of oats.

The dale looked desolation itself, in spite of the gilding of the
setting sun.  Stone lay everywhere: not the limestone of his own hills
and cliffs, but grim, black-looking millstone-grit, which here and there
formed craggy, forbidding outlines; and this did not increase his
satisfaction with his ride, when he took up the rein and began to urge
the cob on, to get through the gloomy place.

But the cob knew better than his master what was best, and refused to
risk breaking its legs among the stones with which the moor was strewn.

"Ugh! you lazy fat brute," cried Mark; "one might just as well walk,
and--Who's that?"

He shaded his eyes from the sun, and looked long and carefully at a
figure a few hundred yards ahead till his heart began to beat fast, for
he felt sure that it was Ralph Darley.  Ten minutes after, he began to
be convinced, and coming to a clearer place where there was a pretence
of a bit of green sward, the cob broke into a canter of its own will,
which brought its rider a good deal nearer to the figure trudging in the
same direction.  Then the cob dropped into a walk again, picking its way
among great blocks of stone; and Mark was certain now that it was Ralph
Darley, with creel on back, and rod over his shoulder, evidently
returning from one of the higher streams after a day's fishing.

Mark's heart beat a little faster, and he nipped his cob's sides; but
the patient animal would not alter its steady walk, which was at about
the same rate as the fisher's, and consequently Mark had to sit and
watch his enemy's back, as, unconscious of his presence, Ralph trudged
on homeward, with one arm across his back to ease up the creel, which
was fairly heavy with the delicate burden of grayling it contained, the
result of a very successful day.

"He has his sword on this time," said Mark to himself, "and I've got
mine."

The lad touched the hilt, to make sure it had not been jerked out of the
scabbard during his ride.

"Just a bit farther on yonder," he muttered, gazing at the steep slope
of a limestone hill to his right, and a mile distant, "there are some
nice level bits of turf.  I can overtake him then, and we can have a bit
of a talk together."

The cob walked steadily on, avoiding awkward places better than his
master could have guided him, and suddenly stopped short at a rocky
pool, where a little spring of water gushed from the foot of a steep
slope, and lowered its head to drink.

"You don't want water now," said Mark angrily; and he tightened the
rein, but his cob had a mouth like leather; and caring nothing for the
bit, bore upon it heavily, stretched out his neck, and had a long deep
drink.

"I wish I had spurs on," muttered Mark; "I'd give you a couple of such
digs, my fine fellow."

Then he sat thinking.

"Good job I haven't got any on.  I should trip, for certain, when we
were at it."

Then the cob raised its dripping mouth, which it had kept with lips very
close together, to act as a strainer to keep out tadpoles,
water-beetles, leeches, or any other unpleasant creatures that might be
in the water, took two or three steps back and aside, and then, noticing
that there was a goodly patch of rich juicy herbage close by the spring,
it lowered its head once more, uttered a snort as it blew the grass
heavily, to drive off any flies that might be nestling among the
strands, and began to crop, crop at the rich feed.

"Oh come, I'm not going to stand that," cried Mark, dragging at the
pony's head.  "You're so full of oats now that you can hardly move, and
he'll be looking back directly, and thinking I'm afraid to come on."

The cob's head was up: so was its obstinate nature.  It evidently
considered it would be a sin to leave such a delicious salad, so
tempting and juicy, and suitable after a peck or two of dry, husky oats;
and, thoroughly determined not to pass the herbage by, it set its fore
feet straight out a good distance apart, and strained at the reins till,
as Mark pulled and pressed his feet against the stirrups, it seemed
probable that there would be a break.

"Oh, you brute!" cried the lad angrily; "you ugly, coarse, obstinate
brute!  Pony!  You're not a pony, I feel sure; you're only a miserable
mule, and your father was some long-eared, thick-skinned, thin-tailed,
muddle-headed, old jackass.  Look here!  I'll take out my sword, and
prick you with the point."

The cob evidently did not believe it, and kept on the strain of the bit,
till the lad took a rein in each hand, and began to saw the steel from
side to side, making it rattle against the animal's teeth.

This seemed to have a pleasant effect on the hard mouth, and produced
the result of the cob nodding its head a little; and just then, to
Mark's great disgust, Ralph turned his head and looked back.

"There!  I expected as much.  Now go on, you beast, or I'll kill you."

The pony snorted with satisfaction, for in his excitement, the rider had
slackened the reins a little.  Down went the animal's muzzle; there was
another puff to blow away the insects, and it began to crop again, with
that pleasant sound heard when grazing animals are amongst rich herbage.

Then followed a fresh struggle, and the pony won, taking not the
slightest notice of the insulting remarks made by its rider about its
descent, appearance, and habits.

But at last, perhaps because it had had its own way, more probably
because it was not hungry, and just when the rider was thinking of
getting down to walk, and sending Dummy Rugg to find the animal next
day, it raised its head, ground up a little grass between its teeth and
then began to follow Ralph once more, as he trudged on without turning
his head again.

Still, try as he would, Mark could not get the animal to break into a
canter; in fact, the way was impossible; and when the sun had sunk down
below the western hill, which cast a great purple shadow, to begin
rising slowly higher and higher against the mountain on his left, he and
Ralph were still at about the same distance apart.

"I can't halloa to him to stop," muttered Mark angrily; "I don't want to
seem to know him, but to overtake him, and appear surprised, and then
break into a quarrel hotly and at once.  Oh! it's enough to drive anyone
mad.  You brute!  I'll never try to ride you again."

Rather hard, this, upon the patient beast which had carried him for many
miles that day, and was carefully abstaining now from cantering
recklessly amongst dangerous stones, and giving its master a heavy fall.
But boys will be unreasonable sometimes, almost as unreasonable as some
men.

Finding at last that drumming the cob's sides was of no use, jerking the
bit of not the slightest avail, and that whacks with the sheathed sword
only produced whisks of the tail, Mark subsided into a sulky silence,
and rode at a walk, watching the enemy's back as he trudged steadily on.

The vale grew more gloomy on the right side, the steep limestone hill
being all in shadow, and the rough blocks looked like grotesque
creatures peering out from among the blackening bushes; and as he rode
on, the lad could not help thinking that by night the place might easily
scare ignorant, untutored, superstitious people, who saw, or fancied
they saw, strange lights here and there.

"And in the sunshine it is as bright as the other hill," thought Mark,
as he glanced at the left side of the dale; "not very bright, though.
It's a desolate place at the best of times;" and once more he glanced up
the steep slope on his right.

"Wonder why they call it Ergles," he mused.  "Let's see; it's up there
where the cave with the hot spring is.  Not a bit farther on."

He was still a long distance from home, and knowing that before long
Ralph Darley would turn off to the left, he again made an effort to urge
on the cob, but in vain.

"And he'll go home thinking I'm afraid," muttered the lad; "but first
time I meet him, and he isn't a miserable, wretched, contemptible
cripple, I'll show him I'm not."

"Then you shall show him now," the cob seemed to say, for it broke into
a smart canter, but only because the bottom of the dale was here free
from stones, and in a very short time Ralph was overtaken.

"Here, hi! fellow! clear the road," shouted Mark; and he essayed to
stop.  But now, the way being good, the cob was anxious to get on and
reach its stable, passing Ralph quickly enough, and enraging its rider
more and more.

"Oh, you brute, you brute!" he muttered.  "Now he can't help thinking
I'm afraid of him.  If I only had a whip."

For the moment Mark felt disposed to turn in the saddle, and make some
insulting gesture at the lad behind--one that would make him, if he had
any courage within, come running rapidly in pursuit.  But the act would
have seemed too weak and boyish, when he wanted to be manly; and he
refrained, contenting himself with dragging hard at the rein, till a
hundred yards farther the ground grew stony again, and the pony dropped
into a walk, and picked its way in and out more slowly than ever.

This had the result that Mark desired, for a glance back showed him that
Ralph was coming on fast, and in a few minutes he had overtaken him,
just as he sprang off his pony and faced round.

"Oh, it is you," said Mark haughtily.

"Yes," said Ralph, meeting his eyes boldly.

"I thought it was.  Well, you are not lame now?"

"No."

"And I see you have a sword."

"Yes, I have my sword."

"Then as we are equal now, and if you are not afraid, we may as well
have a little conversation with them."

"Fight?" said Ralph quietly.  "Why?"

"Ha-ha!" laughed Mark, with his face flushing.  "Why?  Because we are
gentlemen, I suppose; because we have been taught to use our swords; at
least I have; and it's the worse for you if you have not."

"But I have," said Ralph firmly, his own cheeks beginning to look hot;
"but I don't see that this is a reason why we two should fight."

"Then I'll give you another," cried Mark; "because you are a Darley, and
I am an Eden, and we cannot meet without drawing swords.  Your people
were always a set of cut-throats, murderers, robbers, and thieves."

"It's a lie," cried Ralph hotly.  "My people were always gentlemen.  It
was your people who always insulted ours, as you are insulting me now,
and did a few minutes ago, when you passed me going quietly on my way."

"That's enough," said Mark sharply.  "Out of the way, beast," and he
drew his sword and struck the cob sharply on the flank, sending it
trotting onward at the risk of breaking its knees.

"This is your doing," said Ralph quietly, as he threw down his rod, and
passed the strap of his creel over his head, to swing it after.

"Bah! don't talk," cried Mark hotly.  "This place will do.  It is as
fair for you as for me."

He made a gesture with his sword toward a tolerably level spot, and
Ralph bowed his head.

"Then draw," cried Mark, throwing down his cap.

Ralph followed his example, and the next moment his own bright blade
leaped from its sheath, and without further preliminary, they crossed
their trusty blades, which emitted a harsh grating noise as they played
up and down, flashing in the paling evening light, each awaiting the
other's attack.

Mark, in the fear that his enemy would doubt his prowess, began the
attack; and in defending himself from his adversary's thrusts Ralph soon
showed him that he had learned the use of his thin rapier from a master
the equal of his own teacher, thus making the hot-headed youth more
cautious, and ready to turn aside the thrusts which followed when he
ceased his own.

They fenced equally well, and for a few minutes no harm was done.  Then
all at once, in response to a quick thrust, a spot appeared high up
above the russet leather boot which came half-way up Mark's thigh, and
Ralph leaped back with a strange feeling of compunction attacking him
that he could not understand.

"Nothing," cried Mark angrily; "a scratch," as he pressed his teeth upon
his nether lip; and they crossed swords once more, with the wounded lad
commencing the attack with as much vigour as before.  And now, forgetful
of everything but the desire to lay one another _hors de combat_, they
thrust and parried for the next minute, till Ralph uttered a faint cry,
as his adversary's sword passed through his doublet, between his right
arm and ribs, a sharp pang warning him that the blade had pierced
something more than the velvet he wore.

Mark dropped the point of his blade, for at that moment a whistle rang
out, and he looked inquiringly in the direction from which it had come,
leaving himself quite open to any treacherous attack had it been
intended.

But none was meant, Ralph standing with his left hand pressing his side,
just below the armpit, as another whistle was heard from a fresh
direction.  Others followed, and the adversaries looked sharply at each
other.

"Not birds," said Ralph quickly.

"Don't look like it," said Mark bitterly, as he drew his breath with a
hissing noise, as if in pain.

"We're surrounded," cried Ralph excitedly, as they saw six or seven men
appearing from different directions, and evidently all making the spot
where the lads now stood the centre for which they aimed.

"You coward!" cried Mark bitterly--"a trap--your father's men.  _En
garde_!" he shouted.  "You shall pay for this!"

"My father's men?" cried Ralph angrily, as he ignored the other's
preparations for a fresh attack.  "You're mad; can't you see they're
those scoundrels who came to us--Captain Purlrose and his men.  Look,
there he is--up yonder by that hole."

"What do they mean, then?" cried Mark, dropping the point of his weapon.

"Mischief to us," cried Ralph.

"Or me," said Mark suspiciously.

"To us, I tell you," cried Ralph.--"You won't give in?"

"No; will you?"

"Not if you'll stand by me."

"And I will," cried Mark excitedly.

"But you are wounded."

"So are you."

"I don't feel it now."

"No more do I.  Hurrah, then; let them come on!"



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

FIGHTING LONG ODDS.

But the men did not come on, and the two lads, now breathing hard from
their exertions, had time to think as well as recover their breath, for
the men, after carefully approaching singly from different directions,
so as to surround the combatants, now halted as if by one consent a good
fifty yards away, each looking upward from time to time at the burly
cloaked figure high above them, and now standing upon a big block of
stone, making signals by waving his arms and pointing.

In answer to one of these signals, the men all took off the long cloaks
they wore; and in a moment the thought flashed through Mark Eden's brain
that these men must have been seen seated round their fire, somewhere
above, and hence had arisen the rumours of witches on the mountain
slope, the cloaks being their long gowns.

And now, as the men stood fast, in spite of several signs from above,
Ralph suddenly said:

"Perhaps they've only come to see us fight, and are waiting for us to
begin again."

"Not they," cried Mark excitedly.  "I know: they mean to take us
prisoners, and keep us till we're ransomed."

"Perhaps.  That is why we have heard of so many robberies," said Ralph,
whose hot anger against his enemy was fast cooling down.

"Yes, that's it.  The dogs!" cried Mark.  "I know there's a big cave up
there that you go in through a narrow crack.  I saw it once.  They
couldn't get my father to have them up at the Tor, and so they've taken
possession of the cavern and turned robbers.  Well, my father will soon
rout them out of there."

"If yours don't, mine will," replied Ralph.  "But they don't seem
disposed to interfere.  Are they stopping to see us fight?"

"If they are," cried Mark hotly, "they'll have to wait a long time.  I'm
not going to make a raree-show of myself to please them."

"Nor I neither," cried Ralph.  "But," he added hastily, "you know I'm
not afraid?"

"Say you know that I'm not afraid either, and I'll say the same."

"Oh, I'll say that," replied Ralph, "because I know it."

"That's right, then," said Mark; "and we can finish having it out
another time."

"Of course.  I say, though, your leg's bleeding a good deal."

"Oh, never mind that.  So's your arm."

"Can't be deep," said Ralph, "because it only smarts a bit.  I say, look
there!  That's Captain Purlrose upon the stone, and he's making signals
again."

The wide ring of men saw the signs made by the burly figure above, and
they all wrapped their cloaks round their left arms, and then drew their
swords.

"Then they do mean to fight," cried Mark excitedly.

"Yes, but they don't come on.  I say: you're not going to let them take
you prisoner, are you?"

"I'm not going to run away," said Mark sturdily.

"But they are six to one," said Ralph.

"Yes, if you stand still and look on.  If you won't let them take you,
they'll only be three to one."

"I'm going to make a dash for it," said Ralph, setting his teeth hard,
for his wound smarted a good deal, and there was a peculiar warm feeling
as of something trickling down his sleeve.

"What, run away?"

"Who said I was going to run away?" cried Ralph.  "Look here: in war two
kings who hate one another often join together against an enemy."

"Of course," said Mark.

"I hate you and all your family, but we don't want any one else to set
up here, near our homes, do we?"

"No," said Mark sharply.

"Then I'll stand by you like a trump," cried Ralph; "if you'll stand by
me now.  It's long odds, but we've got right on our side."

"Shake hands on it then," cried Mark--"No, we can't do that, because
it's like making friends, when we're enemies and hate one another."

"No, we can't shake hands," said Ralph warmly, "but we can make our
swords kiss hilts, and that's joining together for the fight."

"Agreed," cried Mark; and the lace steel shells of their rapiers clinked
together, making the men, who were watching them intently, exchange
glances.  "I say," said Mark hastily, "wasn't that a mistake?"

"What?"

"Joining like that.  It's making our swords friends."

"Only till this skirmish is over," said Ralph.

"Oh yes; of course.  We can make the blades kiss then.  Here, what's
that Captain what-you-may-call-him doing, waving his arms like that?"

"Means for them to come on and attack.  He's savage because they don't,"
said Ralph.

"Yes, that's it.  I believe they're afraid of getting more holes in
their jerkins."

"Ha-ha!" laughed Ralph; "and they have no room, I suppose.  Look here,
let's have a dash for it."

"What! run away?  That I won't, from them, so long as I've got a sword."

"Run away!  No!" cried Ralph, who was bubbling over with excitement, the
slight wound he had received acting as a spur to his natural desire to
punish some one for his pain.  "Can't you see that if we make a dash at
them on one side, we shall only have two to fight for a bit till the
others can come up; and we might wound the first two if we're quick,
before their companions could attack."

"Well said, general," cried Mark excitedly.  "That's right.  Let's look
sharp then, for my leg hurts as if it was getting stiff."

"Never mind your leg.  Hallo! hark!"

"Why don't you come on yourself, then?" shouted one of the men, in
answer to a good deal of gesticulation from the captain.  "Take care you
don't get a hole in your skin."

"Hurrah!" cried Mark; "they are afraid.  Ready?"

"Yes; come on!" cried Ralph; and the two lads made a rush at the men who
stood in their homeward way, astonishing them so that they turned and
ran before the attacking party had gone half-a-dozen paces.

But a yell of execration rose from the others, as they now made a rush
after the lads, who became pursuers and pursued as well.

A savage yell, too, came from high up the mountain slope, the captain
being joined by the rest of his gang, and standing shouting and waving
his hands furiously.

The position now was this: Two men were running, with the lads some
five-and-twenty yards behind, and gaining on them fast.  Two men were
fifty yards away, to right and left; and two more were right behind,
sixty or seventy yards, in full pursuit.

"Forward!" shouted Mark.  "No mercy, Darley; run your fellow through,
and then turn and spit that fellow on your right."

The two men in front heard the words, and redoubled their efforts, but
they were heavy, middle-aged scoundrels, and plodded clumsily over the
stone-strewed ground; while, forgetting their wounds in the excitement,
Mark and Ralph bounded along, leaping blocks that stood in their way,
and gaining so fast upon their flying enemies, that in a few minutes
they were close up: and the retreating pair, in response to the yells of
their companions, and in despair, turned at bay, when Mark, who was
first, leaped straight at his man, turning the fellow's rusty sword
aside, and came upon the lower part of his chest with his knees, like a
stone from a catapult.

Down went the man, with his sword flying out of his hand, and Mark
nearly fell a couple of yards beyond him, but, active as a fallow deer,
he saved himself by a couple of leaps, as his feet touched the ground;
and he turned, to see Ralph's man down and motionless, as his companion
leaped to his side, and faced round to meet the next two, who, urged on
by the shouts from the hill, charged at them, carried on by their legs,
almost involuntarily, their spirit having little to do with it.

The next minute swords were clashing, there were a few quick parries and
thrusts, and one man dropped his weapon, as Ralph's sword passed through
his shoulder, almost simultaneously with a sharp clang, caused by the
shell of Mark's weapon striking against that of his adversary, whose
blade broke short off at the hilt.  Then, without a moment's hesitation,
the lad struck sidewise at the fellow with his fist, catching him in the
ear, and he staggered sidewise, _hors de combat_.

"Now for the others," cried Ralph wildly, his blood up, and ready for
anything; and they were about to dash at them, when, to their utter
astonishment, the last two turned and ran up the slope toward their
captain and the rest of the party, who were coming to their aid.

"No, no, stop, stop!" yelled Mark, half choking the while with a hoarse
hysterical laugh.  "Oh, what a game!  Here, look; that fellow's getting
his sword."

Without another word, the pair dashed at the disarmed man, who had risen
and picked up his weapon, but he turned and fled.

"Who'd have thought of that?" cried Mark wildly.  "Shall we turn and
attack the others as they come on?"

"No," said Ralph, recovering his coolness; "let's trot on now.  It's
madness to try it again."

"Well, I suppose it would be pushing it too far.  They can't say we're
cowards if we retreat now."

"No; but we can say they are," cried Ralph.  "Why, what a set of curs,
to be beaten by us."

"Yes, and they can't fight a bit.  I could parry their thrusts with a
stick.  But here; I can't lose my pony.  Where is he?"

"And I can't lose my rod and creel," cried Ralph.  "There's your pony
yonder ahead."

"And your fish are right back there.  I'll come with you to fetch them."

"No, no; let them have 'em.  We must retreat now.  Two, four, six,
eight-nine of them now; and I don't think those fellows who are down are
much hurt.  Come along."

For Captain Purlrose was now descending the slope, and his men were
approaching menacingly, spurred on by a shower of oaths, threats, and
abuse from their leader.

"Well, I suppose we must; but my blood's up now," said Mark, "and I hate
running from such a set of curs."

"So do I," said Ralph; "it's like being beaten, when we won.  I say,
were you hurt?"

"Only where you jobbed that sword of yours into my leg.  Phew! it's
getting stiffer every moment.  I shan't be able to walk directly.  Were
you?"

"What, hurt?  No, only where you scratched me."

"It was pretty deep, then, for your sleeve's soaked.  Here, let me tie
my handkerchief round it."

"No, no," said Ralph; "they'll overtake us.  Let's make a run for it
now."

"Shall we?" said Mark unwillingly.

"Yes, we must.  I can't use my arm any more."

"Well, I don't think I can run much farther."

"You must," cried Ralph, sharply as he looked over his shoulder.  "We're
not fit to fight."

He thrust his sound arm through Mark's, and they ran on pretty swiftly
for a hundred yards or so, with the enemy in full pursuit, and then Mark
stopped suddenly.

"Can't go--any farther," he said.  "My leg's awful."

Ralph looked round, to find that the men had given up the pursuit, and
were going back.

"Can we catch your pony?" he said.

"I think so.  He's grazing yonder."

"Would he let me catch him?"

"No," said Mark.  "He'd be off directly.  There, I think I can hobble on
now for a bit.  What! are they coming again?"

"No; only watching us," said Ralph rather faintly.  "Would you mind
tying that tightly round my arm?"

For answer, Mark seized the handkerchief Ralph held out, and knotted it
last round his companion's arm.

"Now let me do something to your leg."

"No; it doesn't bleed now," said Mark.  "Let's get on.  If they see us
crippled, they'll come on again, and if they do I'm good for nothing.
It doesn't bleed; it only feels of no use.  There, let's get on.  Are
they watching us?"

"No, I think not.  It's getting so dark there.  I say; I can see they're
lifting one of the men to carry him."

"Wish some one would carry me," groaned Mark.

"I don't think I can," said Ralph.  "Perhaps I could, though, if you
could hold on."

"Bah!" cried Mark sharply.  "Likely.  Come on, and I'll coax that beast
of a pony.  If I can only get hold of him, I'll make him carry us both."

They pressed on in silence, Mark using his sword as a walking-stick with
one hand, and compelled to accept his enemy's arm, till they came up to
where the cob was grazing.

It let them come close up before raising its head, and then, after
contemplating them for a bit, twitching his ears, as Mark uttered a
series of blandishments, and ended by tossing its head, and spinning
round, as upon a pivot, to trot off.  It failed in this, however, for
Ralph thrust his foot through the trailing rein, and brought the animal
up short.

"Well done!" cried Mark.  "There, jump on, and then pull me across like
a sack."

"Nonsense!  Get on yourself.  I'll help you."

"I shan't, it's my pony.  You're wounded, so get on."

"After you," said Ralph, and, after a little more bandying of words,
Mark felt so sick with pain that he had either to lie down on the earth
or mount.

He did the latter, after several groans, for his leg was very stiff and
painful.

"There's a coward for you," he said.  "Now jump up behind."

"There is no need," said Ralph.  "I can walk."

"That's not fair."

"Never mind.--Get on with you."

This last to the pony, who walked quietly along with his burden in the
pleasant evening light.

For some minutes now neither of the lads spoke, being too much engrossed
by pain and the strangeness of their position.

"I say," said Mark at last, "you'd better come up to the Tor, and drop
me, and I'll lend you the pony to carry your wounded arm home."

"No," said Ralph quietly.  "I shall come a bit farther, and then strike
off.  You can get safe home now."

"Yes, I suppose so; but you ought to have the pony, or one of our men,
to see you safe."

"He'd finish me off," said Ralph grimly, and Mark was silent.

"I say," he said at last; "I shan't say we fought."

"Why?" asked Ralph, in surprise.

"Because it's like bragging so, to talk of two fights.  I shall say the
robbers attacked us, and we beat them off; then they'll get the credit
of our wounds."

"But it will not be true."

"I shan't say they wounded us," replied Mark.  "If my father likes to
think they did it, I shall let him."

"I shan't," said Ralph quietly.  "I shall tell my father everything."

"Well, I suppose it will be best," said Mark.  "But, I say, that fight
doesn't count, you know.  We must begin again where we can't be
interrupted."

"When your leg's better."

"Yes, and your arm's all right."

"Of course."

"Queer thing being such enemies, Darley, isn't it?"

"Very," said Ralph quietly.

"But I suppose it comes natural, though, to our families."

"I have always thought so," replied Ralph.

"I say, I'm glad you're not a coward, though.  They say that all the
Darleys have been cowards."

"Yes; and all the Edens too."

"It's a lie--an abominable lie," cried Mark hotly.  "Do you mean to say
I'm a coward?"

"How could I, after the way you helped me to fight those ruffians this
evening?  I thought you very brave," said Ralph gravely.

"Thank ye.  That's what I thought about you.  But I think it's a pity
you are a Darley."

"Don't say that.  I am very proud to be one, but I say--"

"Yes?"

"Don't you think, instead of paying compliments to one another, we ought
to go and get our wounds properly seen to?"

"Yes, it would be more sensible.  You'll turn off, and go round by the
cliff?"

"Yes, where the path comes up from the river," replied Ralph.

"And we'll finish that fight as soon as ever we can," said Mark.

"Very well.  I suppose we must see who's best man."

"Of course.--Hallo! who's this?"

A figure was dimly-seen coming up through the bushes, along the track
just mentioned, and directly after, it became fully visible as Master
Rayburn with his fish-creel on his back, and rod on shoulder; and they
saw the old man stop short and cry:

"Shade of good Queen Bess!  What's the meaning of this?"



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

MASTER RAYBURN BEGINS TO THINK.

Neither of the lads answered, for a feeling of confusion which troubled
them.  They felt abashed at being seen in each other's company; but they
had to stop, for the old man planted himself right in the middle of the
narrow track, where it passed between two blocks of stone, and as soon
as the cob reached him, it began to sniff at his breast and creel, and
stood still.  "The wolf and the lamb together," said the old man drily,
and in the most serious manner; "but which is wolf, and which is lamb?"
Then, without waiting for a reply, he caught sight of something in the
dimming light beneath the trees, and said; "What's this?  Surely, my
dear lads, you two have not been fighting?  You have--and with swords."

Mark's cheeks flushed, and his eyes fell for a moment before the old
man's piercing eyes; but he recovered himself directly, before Ralph
could speak, and said:

"Yes, we've had a desperate fight coming home.  Set upon by about a
dozen ruffians, and if it had not been for young Darley here--"

"You did as much as I did, or more," cried Ralph.

"Oh, never mind who did most.  We don't know.  Had enough to do without.
But we whipped them, Master Rayburn, and made the beggars run."

"Where was this?" cried the old man.

"In the vale at the foot of Ergles.  They came down from the cave
there."

"Were they a set of disbanded soldiers--those who came up to Cliff
Castle, Ralph?"

"Yes, and to the Black Tor, too," cried Mark.

"I thought as much," said the old man eagerly.  "Then this accounts for
the witches seen on the mountain, and the thefts that have taken place."

"Too late, Master Rayburn," cried Mark, laughing.  "We caught that fish
first.--Didn't we, Darley?"

"Yes; we said that was it," replied Ralph.

"Then I am too late; and I had made up my mind to go out that way, after
I had taken home my fish--after dark--and watch.  So you had to run for
it?"

"Well, I don't know about that," said Mark bluntly.  "We retreated at
last, when they got too many for us, but we charged six of 'em.--Didn't
we, Darley?"

"Yes; and upset four, and the other two ran," said Ralph modestly.  "But
we only had to fight two at a time, and of course that made it even."

"Very," said the old man drily; and his eyes sparkled in the gloom at
the frank way in which the two deadly enemies were relating their
adventures.

"Then some more came down from up above," continued Mark, "and two more
got up again, and the odds seemed to be too great, and we retreated."

"And very wisely too," said Master Rayburn.  "But let me look at your
hurt, Mark, lad.--Tut-tut! soaked with blood.--Wound in the thigh."

"Ah!  Don't touch it," shouted the lad.  "You hurt."

"This must be seen to, my dear boy.  I'll come home with you and dress
it."

"Yes do, please.  It makes me wriggle like a worm on a hook; but he's
hurt too."

"Yes, I see.  Roughly-bandaged, but, tut-tut-tut--why, the sword thrust
has gone through.  There is blood on both sides."

"But it's only through the skin, I think," said Ralph.

"Only through the skin, my lad!  It must be worse than that.  But the
other side?  You paid them for this, I hope."

"Oh yes, we gave them as much as we could, but we didn't kill any one."

"But we saw them carrying one away," said Ralph.

"Oh yes: so we did."

"The villains!  And they wounded you both like this."

Mark glanced at Ralph, and Ralph glanced at him.

"No," said Ralph quietly; "they did not wound us."

"Then how came these injuries?" said the old man anxiously.

"Oh, never mind," cried Mark pettishly; "it doesn't matter.  We got
'em--somehow."

"How was it, Ralph Darley?" said the old man sternly.

"He overtook me, and we quarrelled, and fought," said the lad quietly.

"Ah!"

"And just in the middle of it we found that these men had surrounded
us."

"Yes, yes, yes; don't make such a fuss about it, Master Rayburn," cried
Mark hastily.  "And then we had to join and whip the beggars, and we did
whip 'em at last; and my leg hurts horribly, and you stand there
talking, instead of coming home to doctor it."

"Yes," said the old man, looking at the lad curiously, and then at
Ralph.  "Come along, boy.  You, Darley, you had better come up to the
Black Tor, and be attended to there."

"No, thank you, Master Rayburn; I must make haste back.  Come and see to
my arm when you have done his."

Ralph turned upon his heel as he spoke, and hurried away through the
bushes; while, feeling puzzled, and yet pleased and hopeful, Master
Rayburn gave the cob its head, and walked on and up the steep zigzag
beside his young friend, carefully avoiding all allusion to the lads'
duel, and discussing the possibility of an expedition to drive the
marauders out of their stronghold.

"I'm not a man of war, Mark," he said; "but I shall have to carry a pike
instead of an eel-spear against these villains.  We shall none of us be
safe."

"Oh yes, we'll talk about that to-morrow," said Mark peevishly.  "This
hurts horribly.  I say, don't say anything to my father about my
fighting alongside that young Darley.  I was obliged to, you see."

"Of course you were, my lad!  We must all make common cause against such
an enemy.  No, I will not say anything unless you wish me to."

"Thank ye.  Father mightn't like it, you see."

"But you will tell him?"

"No, I think not--I don't know--well, there, not to-night.  I'm giddy,
and feel sick.  I didn't notice it so much when I was hot and all in the
fight, but it's very painful now.  Would you mind putting your arm round
me?  I feel as if I should fall off."

"My poor brave boy!" said the old man gently, as he supported the
wounded lad.  "There, only a little farther.  Ah!  Hoi!  Rugg!  Dummy
Rugg!  Here, quick!"

The lad, who was perched upon a block of stone half-way up the zigzag,
evidently watching for his young master's return, sprang down and came
running to them.

"What's the matter?" he cried hoarsely.  "Don't say Master Mark's hurt!"

"Hush!  Quiet, boy!" said Master Rayburn quickly.  "Help me to get him
into his own room without frightening Miss Mary."

"Yes; but what's the matter?" cried the boy.

"Been attacked--fighting--slightly wounded."

"But who done it?--I know.  It was them Darleys.  Which of 'em was it?"

"Quiet, I tell you, boy!  Can't you see he has fainted?  Why do you want
to know?"

"To kill him," said the lad, through his teeth.

"Humph! you young savage," muttered Master Rayburn; "then you will not
know from me.  Lead the pony carefully, Dummy," he continued aloud.
"Where is Sir Edward? where is your young mistress?"

"Out in the garden, waiting for him to come home to supper.  Who hurt
him?"

"Will you mind the pony's head, or must I come and lead him?" cried the
old man angrily.

"Yes; but I want to help Master Mark," cried the lad.

"Mind the pony, sir.  Ah! here is one of the men.  Here, you are
stronger than I am.  Lift Master Mark up carefully, so as not to jar his
leg.  Dummy, run in and get a chair."

This was done, another of the serving men coming out to see what was the
matter, and they lifted and bore in the half-fainting lad; while Master
Rayburn disencumbered himself of his creel and rod, and prepared to
follow, to turn chirurgeon instead of angler, when Dummy caught him by
the sleeve.

"You won't tell me who did it?" he said sharply.

"No: it is no affair of yours, boy," said the old man; and he shook him
off, and entered the gate.

"Yes, it is," muttered Dummy; and he did what he had never done before--
sprang after the old man, entered the hall, and caught him by the
sleeve.

"You here, sir!" cried Master Rayburn.  "What is it now?"

"Is Master Mark going to die?"

"Yes, when he grows to be an old man.  Not now.  Go away."

"Yes, I'll go away," muttered Dummy, as he slunk out, and away through
the gate.  "But I want to know who it was.  I know it was one of them
Darleys, and I'm going to see; and if it was, I'll kill him."

As he spoke, the lad stood for a few moments thinking of what he had
better do, and ended by dashing down the steep zigzag path leading to
the bottom of the rock, when he made his way through the gap, and began
to run at a dog-trot in the direction taken by Ralph a quarter of an
hour before.

Ralph, on parting from Mark and Master Rayburn, walked away quite
briskly till he was well out of sight, and then he stopped short to lean
against a tree and rest for a while, for he felt deadly sick.  He laid
his left hand upon his sleeve, and felt that it was very wet; but the
bandage had stopped the bleeding, though not the pain, which was like
the sensation of a hot iron being plunged into his flesh, accompanied by
throbbings which at times seemed too painful to bear.

But after a few minutes' rest he went on again, light in spirit, in
spite of the bodily suffering; and the way seemed short when he was
walking, for his mind was full of the recollections of the day.

For that day had begun well.  The walk had been delightful in the
pleasant cool breeze which blew from the hills, and promised a ripple on
the water of the open river he was bound to fish, and he had not been
deceived.  In fact the grayling had risen freely to the natural fly he
had softly thrown, and his creel had grown heavier till well on in the
afternoon, when he had started back with his load.

Then came the _pad_, _pad_ of the pony's hoofs on the soft grass, with
an occasional click when the shoe caught upon a stone.  Then he was
overtaken by Mark, and the encounter followed, one which was more full
of pleasure in its memories than pain, and the lad's lips curled in a
smile as he went over everything which had passed till they parted.

Somehow these thoughts would be pleasant, although mingled with them
came others of their next meeting.  Every now and then, though, the
lad's progress was hindered by the throbbing of his wound, and the
giddy, faint sensation which followed; and twice over, when his forehead
turned damp, he threw himself down amongst the ferns to lie for a few
minutes on the cool moist earth, with the result each time that the
sensation of swimming and sickness passed off.

Then he rose again, and plodded on, getting nearer and nearer to home;
but the darkness increased till it became hard work to avoid the stones
which lay about, and his way beneath the trees near the river grew
solemn and gloomy in the extreme.

Once he started as he was listening to the croaking of the frogs down
among the sedges and rushes, for a peculiar hoarse cry arose from close
by; but he was country boy enough to know that it was the peculiar
sonorous squawk of a heron, evidently a visitor to the river for the
sake of the aforesaid frogs.

A little farther on, after one of his rests, just as he was starting
again, a low whoo-whoo-whoo! was uttered close to his ear, and answered
from a little farther on, to be apparently echoed again from the trees
high up on the side of the cliff.

But after the first startled sensation, he walked on steadily enough,
for the cry of the brown owl was quite familiar to him, and he knew that
it was only uttered in all probability close to some patch of ivy, where
small birds roosted, to startle them out, ready for the sharp dash of
their enemy's claw, from whose four-way talon clutch there was no
escape.

"How cowardly I am to-night," he said to himself.  "Everything sounds
different.  It's being tired, and feeling the pain of my wound.  Soon be
home now."

Then he began thinking of his father, and what he would say about the
two encounters; and in imagination he saw his stern frowning face.

But he was satisfied that Sir Morton would be glad to hear the news
about Captain Purlrose and his men, and he began to think that there
would be some talk of attacking the gang of thieves in their
lurking-place; for, as Master Rayburn had said, they could not be
allowed to harbour there.

Ralph gave quite a jump now, for he heard a sharp rustling sound,
followed by the rattle of a little stone, a short distance behind him,
and he increased his pace, with his heart beating heavily.

"Just as if some one was following me," he thought, "and stepped upon a
stone, and sent it rolling."

But he soon calmed down again, though he did not slacken his pace,
keeping on as fast as his weakness and the darkness would allow, with
the result that it was not more than half of his ordinary rate.

Again he was startled by a sound behind, this time as if a piece of dead
wood had cracked sharply, from the weight of some one following.

This time it was nearer, and succeeded by a rustling, plainly enough
caused by some one or something forcing a way through the bushes.  Some
one or something?  The lad felt that it must be something.  If it had
been some one, he would have spoken; but what thing could it be?

He was in a dense part of his way now, with the sky quite hidden by the
overhanging boughs, so that it was not possible to see more than a few
feet behind or before him, and hence he looked back in vain; and though
he listened intently there was no heavy snorting breath, such as he
would probably have heard if it had been pony or cow.

"It's some one tracking me," thought the lad at last, as again he heard,
very near him now, the rustle of the leaves and the flying back of
twigs.

So impressed was he now, and satisfied that whoever followed might mean
him harm, that he essayed to draw his sword as he hurried on; but the
sheer agony caused to the stiffened wound made him drop his hand at
once, and trust to getting out of the wood to where the ground was more
open, and he could reach the cliff, for he felt that now he could not be
many hundred yards from the way leading to the step-like path cut in the
stone.

Again there was a quick rustle, as if his pursuer had tried to diminish
the distance, and a minute later this sounded so near that, convinced of
his follower being one of the men who had attacked them that evening,
Ralph suddenly faced round--just when the sensation was strong that some
one was about to leap upon him and strike him down--and shouted aloud:

"Keep back, whoever you are.  I am armed."

"Ralph! that you?" came from a short distance in his rear.

"Yes, yes, quick!" cried the lad faintly; and he staggered on now, to
find himself a minute later in his father's arms.

"Why, Ralph, boy, what does this mean?  I have half-a-dozen men out
hunting for you."

"I'll--I'll tell you presently," panted the lad, who was bathed in
sweat.  "Draw your sword, and be on your guard.  Some one has been
following me this last half-hour."

"Who?"

"I don't know.  Be on your guard."

"Not fancy, is it, my boy?" said Sir Morton, rather doubtfully.

There was a sharp rustling sound, and a foot kicked a stone, as its
owner was evidently retreating fast.

"Humph!  Then some one has been following you.--Hallo, there! stop!"

"Hoi! hillo!" came from a distance in answer.

"Quick!" said Sir Morton.  "This way, man.  Found--found!"

The cliffs echoed the words, and Sir Morton took the lad's arm and
pressed it firmly--fortunately the left.

"I beg your pardon, Ralph.  I thought you were scared by the darkness of
the wood.  Some one was after you; but it would be folly to try and
catch him in this gloomy place.  Why, what's the matter, boy? you are
reeling about.  Feel faint?"

"Yes," panted the lad heavily.  "I have been fighting--wounded.  Help
me, please."

Sir Morton Darley passed his arm under his son's, and helped him quickly
along; a whistle brought Nick Garth and another man to his side; and the
former carried the lad right up the slope to the entrance of the castle,
where a little rest and refreshment recovered the sufferer sufficiently
to enable him to relate why he had brought back no fish, a task he had
hardly ended, when Master Rayburn entered to dress his second patient's
arm.

"We must put an end to such alarms as this, Master Rayburn," said Sir
Morton angrily.

"Ay; and the sooner the better," cried that gentleman, as he carefully
re-bandaged the lad's hurt.--"I wonder," he said to himself, "whether
Ralph has told him how he obtained his wound?  Is this the beginning of
the end?"



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

WHAT SIR MORTON SAID.

Master Rayburn, the old scholar, angler, and, in a small way,
naturalist, had no pretensions to being either physician or surgeon; but
there was neither within a day's journey, and in the course of a long
career, he had found out that in ordinary cases nature herself is the
great curer of ills.  He had noticed how animals, if suffering from
injuries, would keep the place clean with their tongues, and curl up and
rest till the wounds healed; that if they suffered from over-eating they
would starve themselves till they grew better; that at certain times of
the year they would, if carnivorous creatures, eat grass, or, if
herbivorous, find a place where the rock-salt which lay amongst the
gypsum was laid bare, and lick it; and that even the birds looked out
for lime at egg-laying time to form shell, and swallowed plenty of tiny
stones to help their digestion.

He was his own doctor when he was unwell, which, with his healthy,
abstemious, open-air life, was not often; and by degrees the people for
miles round found out that he made decoctions of herbs--camomile and
dandelion, foxglove, rue, and agrimony, which had virtues of their own.
He it was who cured Dan Rugg of that affection which made the joints of
his toes and fingers grow stiff, by making him sit for an hour a day,
holding hands and feet in the warm water which gushed out of one part of
the cliff to run into the river, and coated sticks and stones with a
hard stony shell, not unlike the fur found in an old tin kettle.

He knew that if a man broke a leg, arm, or rib, and the bones were laid
carefully in their places, and bandaged so that they could not move,
nature would make bony matter ooze from the broken ends and gradually
harden, forming a knob, perhaps, at the joining, but making the place
grow up stronger than ever; and it took no great amount of gumption to
grasp the fact that what was good for a cut finger was equally good for
arm, head, leg, or thigh; that is to say, to wash the bleeding wound
clean, lay the cut edges together, and sew and bandage them so that they
kept in place.  With a healthy person, nature did all the rest, and
Master Rayburn laughed good-humouredly to himself as he found that he
got all the credit.

"Nature doesn't mind," he used to say to one or other of the lads.
"There's no vanity there, my boys; but I'm not half so clever as they
think."

But let that be as it may, Master Rayburn mended Dummy Rugg when he fell
from top to bottom of the steep slope leading down into the lead-mine,
getting thereby very much broken, the worst injury being a crack in his
skull.  He "cobbled up," as he called it, a number of other injuries
which happened to the men by pieces of rock falling upon them, slips of
the steel picks, chops from axes, and cuts from scythes and
reaping-hooks, the misfortunes of the men who toiled in the woods and
fields.

If a regular physician or surgeon had come there, the people would have
laughed at him, so great was their faith in Master Rayburn, who did his
best for the people, and never asked for payment.  In fact, his patients
never thought of offering it to him in money, but they were not
ungrateful, all the same.  Indeed, he used to protest against the
numbers of presents he was always receiving, the women bringing him pats
of butter, little mugs of cream, and the best of their apples and
potatoes; and their husbands never killed a pig without taking something
to Master Rayburn for the kind actions which he had performed.

It fell out then, as quite a matter of course, that he went on treating
Ralph Darley for the little hole in his arm, beneath the shoulder joint,
and that he also dressed and bandaged Mark Eden's thigh, so that the
injuries went on healing rapidly.

It was known, too, at the Cliff Castle and the Black Tor that he was
treating both, but the Edens never mentioned the Darleys, nor the
Darleys the Edens, the amateur surgeon saying nothing at either place;
and the wounds got better day by day.

"I wish I could heal the old sore as easily," the old man said to
himself; "but that wants a bigger doctor than I."

Master Rayburn believed in the old saw, that a still tongue maketh a
wise head, and he waited.

But in the meantime Ralph had told his father everything about his
encounter, and waited afterwards to hear what his father said.  In due
time he did say something, but it was not to the effect that Mark Eden
had behaved very gallantly in helping his son, and _vice versa_, that
his son had shown a fine spirit in forgetting family enmity, and
fighting against a common enemy.  He only frowned, and said, "Humph!"

He said something more, though upon another occasion, when, in obedience
to Master Rayburn's orders, Ralph was keeping quiet at home, and sitting
in his father's room, reading, and thinking about Mark Eden,
determining, too, that he would ask Master Rayburn how the lad was the
next time he came, for though family pride and old teachings had kept
him quiet, he had hoped that his doctor would volunteer the information
which had not come.

Sir Morton was poring over an old tome which dealt with alchemy and the
transmutation of metals, in which the learned writer gravely gave his
opinion about baser metals being turned into gold, all of which Sir
Morton Darley thought would be very satisfactory, as he could not
succeed in finding a profitable lead-mine on his estate, and had not
been any more successful than his forefathers in taking possession of
that belonging to the Edens.

He had just come to the way of thinking that he would begin to buy
ordinary lead and turn it into gold, when Ralph said suddenly:

"I say, father, why do we want to be at enmity with the Edens?"

Sir Morton looked up at his son, and then down at his book, as if
expecting to find an answer to the question there.  Then he coughed to
clear his voice, cleared it, and coughed again, which was perfectly
unnecessary.  But still the answer did not come.  Finally, he replied:

"Well, you see, my boy, we always have been at enmity with them."

"Yes, I know, ever since my great, great, ever so great, grandfather's
time."

"Exactly Ralph.  That's it, my boy."

"But what was the beginning of it?"

"The beginning of it--er--the--er--commencement of it--er--the family
feud.  Well--er--it was something in the way of oppression, as I have
told you before.  A great injury inflicted by the Edens upon the
Darleys.  But it will not do your arm any good to be fidgeting about
that.  I want it to heal.  That can be healed; but our family feud never
can."

"Why not, father?"

"Why not?  Oh, because it is contrary to nature, boy.  What a question,
when you are suffering now from the way in which the deadly hatred of
the Edens comes out!  Are you not wounded by a scion of the vile house?"

"Yes, father; but then young Eden is suffering too in the same way, and
I think he got the worst of it."

"I'm glad of it, Ralph.  I think you behaved very bravely."

"What; in fighting the robbers?"

"I did not mean that.  I meant in defending yourself," said Sir Morton
austerely.  "There, that will do: I want to go on studying this book."

But Ralph was fidgety from the state of his wound, and went on again.

"Couldn't the old trouble be settled by law?"

"Pooh, boy!  As I have told you before, the law does not reach here
among these mountainous wilds.  I am the law here.  I could settle the
matter; but that man Eden would never agree to what I said."

"And I suppose, father, that you would never agree to what he considered
was the proper law."

"Certainly not, Ralph," said Sir Morton impatiently.  "But why are you
going on like this?"

"Because I was thinking again how easy it would be if you and Sir Edward
Eden were to join and attack that Captain Purlrose and his men.  You
would be able to drive the gang out of the neighbourhood."

"I shall be able to drive this fellow out of the district, my boy,
without the help of the Edens, who ought to be driven out too, for they
are very little better than Captain Purlrose and his men.  Stop, sir;
what are you going to do?"

"Go out, father.  It's so dull sitting here."

"You had better stay in: the sun is hot, and you have been rather
feverish.  I want you to grow quite well."

"So do I, father," said the lad, smiling.

"Then do what Master Rayburn advised you.  Keep perfectly quiet."

"But it is such weary work doing nothing, father.  I'm sure I should get
better if I were out in the fresh air.  Ah, there is Minnie;" for just
then his sister came to the open window, and looked in.

"Why don't you come out and sit in the shade here, Ralph?" she said.
"Come and read with me."

Ralph glanced at his father, who shrugged his shoulders and nodded, as
much as to say, "Well, be off;" and the lad went out into the
castle-yard, and then on to the little terrace where the new basin and
fountain were looking bright and attractive, though still wanting in the
fish Ralph was to have procured.

Brother and sister sat down in a shady nook, and watched the glint of
the river through the trees far below, looked over the lovely prospect
of hill and dale; and finally Minnie's eyes rested upon the shoulder of
the great shaley hill at whose foot the encounter with the disbanded
soldiers had taken place.

"When is father going to lead the men to drive out those dreadful
people?" said the girl at last.

"I don't know: soon, I hope.  When I'm better."

"Well, you are better, Ralph."

"That's what I told father.  Only a bit sore.  I'm sick of being coddled
up."

"That's because you are a boy.  You are never happy unless you are in
the open-air."

"You would not be, if you were a boy," said Ralph sharply.

"Well, I don't know that I am, even as a girl.  It's dreadful.  You
know, father has given orders that I am not to go outside the walls.  No
walks, no rides; and my poor pony looked so reproachfully at me.  Wants
to go out as badly as I do.  Don't you think it's being too particular?"

"Well, no, Min," said Ralph thoughtfully.  "While those men are about, I
don't think you ought to go out alone."

"Now, Ralph," said the girl, pouting, "you're as bad as father.  I
declare you are not a bit like a nice, brave, merry boy now.  You used
to be; but ever since you've been at that great school you have been
growing more and more serious, till you are getting to be quite an old
man."

"And quite grey," said Ralph drily.

"It only wants that," said the girl, with a merry laugh.  "I declare
that old Master Rayburn has more fun in him than you."

"Wouldn't say so if you had been wounded, and had him to pull the
bandages about."

"What nonsense! he said I was to come and see him as soon as ever I
could."

"And you can't go and see him.  He wouldn't advise you to go out while
those ruffians are yonder."

"No," replied the girl, smiling frankly.  "He said I must wait till the
wasps' nest had been burned out, and I suppose he meant the cave where
those men are.  Oh, I wish I were a man, and could go and fight the
wretches.  They've been robbing and frightening people in all
directions.  They even went last night and frightened old Mistress
Garth, Nick's mother, and took away her bag of meal."

"They did that!" cried Ralph angrily.  "How do you know?"

"Nick told me, and he says he means to kill the captain first time they
meet."

"Nick says so?"

"Yes; but I suppose it's only boasting.  I don't think he's very brave,
is he?"

"Don't know," said Ralph thoughtfully.  "But it's quite time something
was done."

"And it was so funny, Ralph," continued the girl; "he actually said to
me that he didn't care a bit for his mother, for she has the worst
temper of any one he knows, and is always scolding when he goes to see
her; but he won't have any one interfere with her, and he'll kill that
captain for stealing the meal-bag as sure as he's alive."

"Well, it shows he's a good son," said Ralph quietly.  "But you see that
it is not safe for you to go out."

"Yes," said Minnie with a sigh; "but it seems very silly.  The other day
one was obliged to stop in because of the Edens; now it's because of
those men."

"I suppose it's as bad for the Edens as it is for us," replied Ralph,
who became now very thoughtful; and when, soon afterwards, Minnie looked
up to see why he did not speak, she found that his head was resting
against the stone, beside a crenelle, and that he was fast asleep.

"Poor boy!" she said softly, "he is weak yet, and soon worn-out.  It was
very brave of him to fight as he did--with Mark Eden, I mean--against
the men who attacked them, and for both to be wounded.  I wonder what
Mark Eden is like.  Ralph has met him three times, he says, but he only
growls if I begin to ask him questions.  What a pity it is, when we
might all be so friendly and nice.  How stupid it does seem of people to
quarrel!"



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

HOW MARK'S SISTER LOST HER WHIP.

Fate seemed to be determined that the young people of the rival families
should become intimate, in spite of all the stringent rules laid down by
the heads; for Ralph was out one day, making a round, when it occurred
to him that he would call upon Master Rayburn, to let him see how well
the wound was healing up, and to say a few words of thanks to the old
man for his kindness and attention.

He found the object of his visit seated in a kind of grotto, shaded by a
great sycamore, with his doublet off, hat on the floor, and beautifully
white sleeves rolled up, busily at work, tying up some peculiar little
combinations of wool, hair, and feathers, to the back of a hook; and as
the lad approached, he held up the curious object by the piece of
horsehair to which it was tied.

"Well, patient," he said, "what do you think of that?"

"Nothing at all," cried the lad.  "No fish would ever take that.  What
do you call it?"

"A bumble-bee, and the fish will take it, Mr Cleversides; but not if
they see a big lubberly boy staring at them with his arm in a sling, or
an old grey-headed man, either, Ralph.  There, don't frown.  It's very
nice to be a big lubberly boy; much better than being a worn-out old
man, with not much longer to live.  Ah, you laugh at my bumble-bee, and
it certainly is not like one, but the best I can do, and I find it a
great bait for a chevin, if used with guile.  Take these two, Ralph,
boy, and early some sunny morning go down behind the trees, where they
overhang the stream, and don't show so much as your nose, let alone your
shadow, for it would send them flying.  Then gently throw your fly."

[Note: a chevin is a chub.]

"How can you," said Ralph quickly, "with the boughs overhanging the
water?"

"Good, lad! what I expected you to say; but there is where the guile
comes in.  I don't want you to throw your fly into the water, but to let
it drop on the leaves just above it, a few inches or a foot, and then
shake the line tenderly, till the bee softly rolls off, and drops
naturally from a leaf, hardly making a splash.  Then you'll find that
there will be a dimple on the water, the smacking of two lips, and the
chevin will have taken the bait.  Then it is your fault if it is not
laid in your creel."

"Thank you, Master Rayburn; I'll try.  I haven't had a fish since I was
wounded."

"No: it would have been bad work if you had gone whipping about, and
irritating the two little holes in your arm.  Well, how is it?"

"Oh, quite well now," said the lad, as he carefully hooked the bees in
his cap, and twisted the hair to which they were attached under the
band; "and I've come to say how thankful I am for all you have done for
me, and--"

"That's enough, my dear boy," cried the old man warmly; "look the rest.
And now about those wild men of the mountains; have you heard how they
are going on?"

"A little; not much."

"Ah, you don't know, or you would not talk about a little.  Why, Ralph,
boy, the country round is full of complaints of their doings.  About a
dozen great idle scoundrels are living up at Ergles in that cave, laying
the people for miles round under contribution; picking the fat of the
land, and committing outrage after outrage.  Only during the past week,
I've had to bind up two broken heads, and strap up a broken shoulder,
where the poor fellows had made a brave fight for it--one man against
seven or eight."

"You don't mean that!" cried Ralph flushing.

"But I do, boy.  They are growing worse and worse, and making themselves
a scourge to the country."

"I did not know it was so bad."

"No, I suppose not, sir; and here are you people living safely in your
castles, with plenty of stout men about you, ready to arm and defend you
behind your walls and gates.  But if the scoundrels came and robbed you,
perhaps you would do something.  Don't you think you ought to begin?"

"Yes, that I do," cried Ralph quickly.  "My father has been talking
about it for some time."

"Yes; and so has Sir Edward Eden been talking about it for some time;
but neither of them does anything, and the wasps' nest thrives; all the
best things in the country are carried up there--the wasps robbing the
bees; and I, though I am a man of peace, say that it is the duty of you
gentlemen to burn that wasps' nest out before anything worse is done,
for the ruffians grow more bold and daring every day, feeling, I
suppose, that they can do these things with impunity."

"Father shall do something at once," cried the lad.

"That's right," cried the old man, patting his late patient on the
shoulder.  "I don't want blood shed, and I hardly think any of your
people would come to much harm, for, like most scoundrels of their kind,
I believe the enemy would prove miserable cowards."

"They have proved to be so," cried Ralph warmly.  "Father must act now."

"I'll tell you what he ought to do, boy," said the old man, grasping his
visitor by the arm.  "Of course he need not make friends, but he ought
to go or send to the Black Tor, and ask Sir Edward to head so many men,
your father doing the same; and then they could march together, and rout
out the scoundrels."

"Yes, it would be easy enough then," said Ralph sadly; "but I know my
father too well: he would not do that."

"No," said the old man, "he would not do that."

The tone in which this was said roused the lad's indignation.

"Well," he said hotly, "do you think this Sir Edward Eden would come and
ask my father to join him?"

"No, boy, I do not," replied the old man, "for I said something of this
kind to Mark Eden only yesterday, when I was fishing up that way, and he
spoke just in the same way as you do."

"You saw him yesterday?" said Ralph eagerly.  "How is he?"

"What's that to do with you?" said the old man rather roughly.  "You
don't want to know how your enemy is.  But all the same, his leg is
nearly well.  He limps a little: that is all.  Going?"

"Yes," said Ralph hurriedly; "I must be off now.  I am going on about a
mile, and coming back this way.  Perhaps I shall see you then."

"Going about a mile?  Not going to see old Mother Garth?"

"Yes: to take her a present from my sister.  Nick told her about his
mother being robbed."

"And your sister wants to make it up to her.  Poor old woman! she is in
great trouble, but she will not hear of leaving her cottage up there on
the moor; and she says that next time the men come to rob her, they'll
find she has two pots of boiling water ready for them."

Ralph laughed, and went off, crossed the river at the shallows, and
climbed the ascent to where the old woman lived in her rough stone cot,
in its patch of garden; and as soon as he had given his present, with an
addition from his own purse, and the fierce old lady had secured it in
her pocket, she turned upon him angrily, upbraiding him and his for
allowing such outrages to be committed.

"But there," she cried, when quite out of breath, "it's of no use to
speak: there are no men now, and no boys.  When I was young, they'd have
routed out those wretches and hung them before they knew where they
were.  But only let them come here again, and they shall know what
boiling water is."

"They'll be well punished before long," said Ralph, as soon as he could
get in a word.

"I don't believe it," cried the old woman.  "Don't tell me!  I want to
know what my boy, Nick, is about for not making his master do something.
It's shameful.  But I see how it is: I shall have to go and do it
myself."

Ralph was not sorry to get away from the ungracious old dame, who stood
at her door, shouting messages to his father about his duty and her
intentions, till the lad was out of sight, when he could not help seeing
the comic side of the matter, and wondered, laughingly, what his father
would say to her if she kept her word, and came up to the castle to ask
him why he and her son, Nick, did not go and punish those wicked men for
coming and stealing her bag of meal.

"I should like to be there," said Ralph, half-aloud, as he tramped on:
and then his thoughts took a serious turn again, and he began to ponder
upon the possibilities of his father and their men attacking Captain
Purlrose, and the chances of success.

"It ought to be done," thought Ralph, as he began to climb the path
leading to the shelf upon which Master Rayburn's cottage was built,
half-a-mile farther on, "so as to take them by surprise when part of the
men are away.  It can hardly be called cowardly with men like them.
Then we could hide in the cavern, and wait till the rest came back, and
take them prisoners too.  What's that?"

He listened, and made out the sound of a horse galloping, wondering the
while who it could be.  Then his interest increased, for the track was
narrow and stony, and ran along like a shelf beside the cliff, with a
steep descent to the river--altogether about as dangerous a place for a
canter as any one could choose.  But he recalled immediately how
sure-footed the ponies of the district were, and thought no more of it
for a few moments.  Then his face flushed as he remembered how Mark Eden
had galloped after him.  Would it be he, and if so, now they were going
to meet again, would it be upon inimical terms, and with drawn swords?

His heart began to beat faster, and the next minute it was beating
faster still, for he caught sight, at a curve of the track, of the pony
and its burden, not Mark Eden, but a lady; and then his heart seemed to
stand still in his horror at seeing that she had lost control of the
spirited little animal, which was tearing along as hard as he could go.

The next minute it was nearly abreast of Ralph, who, without thinking of
the consequences of such an act, leaped at the rein, caught it, and was
dragged along some twenty yards, before, snorting and trembling, the
little animal, which he knew as Mark Eden's, stopped short, and began to
rear.

"Quick!" shouted the lad.  "I can't hold him: try and slip off."

His words were heard by the frightened rider, but there was little need
to tell her to slip off, for the pony reared again, nearly upright, the
rider glided from the saddle over the animal's haunches, and fell
amongst the bushes by the track, while Ralph was dragged onward again.

It all occurred in a few moments, the pony stopped, reared again, made
another bound, dropped off the track, and, as Ralph loosed his hold,
rolled over and over down the steep slope right into the river with a
tremendous splash, which cooled it on the instant; and it regained its
feet, scrambled actively ashore, gave itself a shake, and then began to
graze, as if nothing was the matter.

"Mark Eden's sister," thought Ralph, as he hurriedly climbed back to the
track, where, looking wild and scared, Mary Eden had just regained her
feet, and was standing trembling.

"Are you hurt?" he cried aloud.

"Yes, dreadfully.  No: I don't think so.  Only scratched," she replied,
half-crying.  "I couldn't stop him.  He hasn't been out lately.  He ran
away with me.  What shall I do?" she sobbed now.  "Mark will be so
angry.  Is his pony much hurt?"

"Oh, never mind the pony," cried Ralph, taking her hand.  "Here, let me
help you to Master Rayburn's."

"But I do mind about the pony," cried the girl angrily.  "It doesn't
matter about me.  Do you think he has broken his knees, or his legs?"

"It does not seem like it," said Ralph, smiling.  "Look, he is browsing
on the thick grass down there."

"Is--is my face much scratched?"

"Hardly at all," said Ralph.

"Then thank you so for stopping him; I was so frightened.  Ah, look!
there's Master Rayburn."

She clapped her hands with delight, as she caught sight of the old man,
hatless, and with his white hair flying, running down the path.  Then
turning, back to Ralph, she said, naively:

"Please, who are you?  Oh, I know now.  I haven't seen you for two
years, and--"

She shrank away from him in a peculiarly cold and distant manner, and at
that moment Master Rayburn panted up.

"Much hurt, my dear?" he cried excitedly, as he caught the girl in his
arms.

"No, no, I think not," she said, beginning to sob anew.

"Thank God! thank God!" cried the old man fervently.--"Hah!  My heart
was in my mouth.  Why can't people be content to walk?  Come back home
with me, my child.  Here, Ralph Darley, how was it?  Did you stop the
brute?"

"I tried to," said the lad quietly, "but I couldn't hold him long."

"Long enough to save her, my lad," cried the old man, looking from one
to the other in a peculiar way.--"How strange--how strange!" he
muttered.

Then aloud, in an abrupt way:

"There, never mind the pony.  You be off home, sir.  I'll take care of
this lady."

Ralph coloured a little, and glanced at the girl, and as she met his
eyes, she drew herself up stiffly.

"Yes, sir," she said, "Master Rayburn will take care of me.  Thank you
for stopping my pony."

She bowed now, in the stately way of the period, clung closely to the
old man, turning her back upon her rescuer, who unnecessarily bowed, and
walked on up the steep path, wondering that the pony had not come down
headlong before.

Then he felt disposed to look back, but his angry indignation forbade
that, and he hurried on as fast as he could on his way home, passing
Master Rayburn's cottage, and then, a hundred yards farther on, coming
suddenly upon a riding-whip, which had evidently been dropped.  The lad
leaped at it to pick it up, but checked himself, and gave it a kick
which sent it off the path down the slope toward the river.

"I'm not going to pick up an Eden's whip," he said proudly.  "Just like
her brother," he muttered, as he went on faster and faster, to avoid the
temptation of running back to pick it up.  "They are a proud, evil
race," as father said.  "What did I want to interfere for, and stop the
pony?  It was looked upon as an insult, I suppose.  I don't like the
Edens, and I never shall."

Ralph's adventures for that day were not ended.  A quarter of a mile
farther on he heard footsteps in front.  Some one was running, and at a
turn of the track a lad came into sight, whom he recognised as Dummy
Rugg, one of the mine lads.  The pair came closer quickly, and Ralph saw
that he was recognised, and that the boy was scowling at him, passing
him with rather an evil look, but stopping the next minute, and running
back after him.  As soon as he heard the steps returning, Ralph faced
round, his left hand seeking the sheath of his sword, to bring it round
in case he should want to draw.  But the next minute he saw that the lad
had no evil intent.

"Look here," cried Dummy, "did you see a young lady on a pony?"

"Yes."

"Was it going fast?"

"As fast as it could go," said Ralph haughtily.

"Not running away wi' her?"

"Yes," said Ralph, rather enjoying the boy's anxiety, in his ruffled
state.

"I knowed it would: I knowed it would!" cried the boy wildly; "and she
would have it out.  Here! gone right on?"

"Yes."

"Ah!  And you never tried to stop it.  Oh, wait till I see you again!"

Ralph did not feel in the humour to stop and explain to one who had
threatened him so offensively, and he would have felt less so still if
he had known that Dummy Rugg had followed him that night through the
dark woods, till he met his father.

"Let him find out for himself," he muttered.  "I have nothing to do with
the Edens, and we can none of us ever be friends."



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

DUMMY TURNS STUNT.

Dummy Rugg caught the pony, after seeing that his young mistress was
unhurt at Master Rayburn's cottage; and, perfectly calm now, the girl
insisted upon remounting, the old man opposing her, until Dummy gave him
a curious look or two, and a nod of the head.

"And there is no need whatever for you to go up home with me, Master
Rayburn," she said.  "It is all uphill now, and the pony will not run
away again."

"Very well, Mistress Obstinacy," said the old man, smiling and patting
her cheek, before helping her on the pony; "but I feel as if I ought to
see you home safely."

"There is no need, indeed," cried the girl.  "Goodbye, and thank you.
I'm afraid I frightened you."

"You did, my child, terribly.  More than you frightened yourself.  I was
afraid that the little girl who used to ask for rides on _my_ foot would
be killed."

"But it was only a gallop, Master Rayburn," said the girl, leaning
forward to receive the old man's kiss.  "Please, if you see Mark, don't
say anything about it, or he will not lend me his pony again.--Now
Dummy, let go the rein."

"Come on!" growled the lad, leading the frisky little animal, and Master
Rayburn chuckled a little, for the boy bent his head, rounded his
shoulders, and paid not the slightest heed to the order he had received.

"Do you hear, Dummy?  Let go."

Dummy let go of the rein by passing his arm through, and thrust his hand
into his pocket.

"Do you hear me, sir?" cried the girl imperiously.  "Let go of that rein
directly."

"Have let go," grumbled the boy.

"Go away from his head, and walk behind."

"Run away agen if I do," said Dummy.

"He will not," cried the girl angrily.  "I shall hold him in more
tightly."

"Haven't got strength enough."

"I have, sir.  How dare you!  Let go."

"Nay: Master Mark would hit me if I did, and Sir Edward'd half-kill me."

"What nonsense, sir!  Let go directly."

Dummy shook his big head, and trudged on by the pony.

"Oh!" cried the girl, with the tears of vexation rising in her eyes.  "I
will not be led, as if I were a little child.  Go behind, sir,
directly."

"Nay," growled Dummy.

"Let go, sir, or I'll beat you with the whip.--Ah! where is it?"

"Beat away," said Dummy.

"I really will, sir, if you don't let go."

Dummy laughed softly, and Mary Eden could not see his face, but she saw
his shoulders shaking; and in her anger she leaned forward and tried to
drag the rein from the lad's arm.

"You'll have him off the path agen if you don't mind, Mistress Mary."

"Where is my whip?  I've lost my whip," cried the girl.

"Good job--for me," said the boy, with a little laugh.

"If you don't let go of that rein, directly, sir, I'll make my brother
beat you," cried Mary angrily.

"You won't tell him he ran away," said the boy, without turning his
head.

"Then my father shall, sirrah!"

"Won't tell him neither, mistress."

"Then I'll tell him you were rude and impertinent to me, sirrah, and
he'll have you horsewhipped for that."

"Master Mark's sister couldn't tell a lie with her pretty little lips,"
said the boy quietly, and never once looking round.  "Pony's too fresh,
and I won't see my young mistress get into trouble again--so there!"

Mary Eden flushed with annoyance, and tried to stamp her foot, but only
shook the stirrup, and sat still for a few moments, before trying
cajolery.

"The pony's quite quiet now, Dummy," she said gently.  "Let him have his
head again--there's a good boy."

Dummy shook his own, and Mary bit her red lip, and made it scarlet.

"But I shouldn't like to be seen led up home like this, Dummy," she said
softly.  "It looks as if I can't ride."

"Every one knows you can ride beautiful, mistress."

"But please let go now."

"Nay: won't."

"I'll give you some money, Dummy."

"Wouldn't for two donkey panniers full o' gold--there!" cried the lad.
"Come on."

This to the pony, and then the boy checked the cob.

"That your whip, mistress?" he said, turning and wagging his head
sidewise towards where, half-a-dozen yards down the steep slope, the
whip lay, where Ralph had kicked it on to a clump of brambles.

"Yes, yes; get it for me, please," cried the girl eagerly.

Dummy drew his arm from the pony's rein, leaped off the shelf path, and
lowered himself step by step toward the whip; and the girl, after
waiting a few seconds, with her eyes flashing with satisfaction, shook
the rein, kicked at her steed's ribs, and did all she could to urge it
forward.

"Go on--go on!" she whispered sharply.  Then, as this was of no avail,
she began to saw the bit to and fro in its mouth, but only made the
animal swing its head from side to side in response to each drag,
keeping all four legs planted out firmly like a mule's, and obstinately
refusing to move.

"Oh, you wicked wretch!" cried the girl angrily; "go on--go on!"

At the first efforts she made to force the pony on and leave him behind,
Dummy turned sharply, and made a bound to catch at the rein; but as soon
as he grasped the stubborn creature's mood--knowing its nature by
heart--he chuckled softly, and went on down to where the whip lay,
recovered it as deliberately as he could, and began to climb the slope
again.

"It aren't no good, Miss Mary," he said; "he won't go till I get back to
his head."

"Go on--go on, sir!" cried the girl angrily, as she saw her last chance
of escape dying away; and then, hardly able to restrain the tears of
vexation, for Dummy climbed back on to the track, went to his old place
by the pony's head, and handed her the whip.

Mary snatched it in an instant, and struck the pony a sharp blow, which,
instead of making it leap forward, had the opposite effect; for it
backed, and but for Dummy seizing the rein once more, its hind-legs
would have gone over the edge.

"Look at that, mistress," said the boy quietly; "see what you nearly
did;" and, slipping his arm through once more, he walked on, cheek by
jowl with the pony, which seemed on the most friendly terms with him,
swinging its nose round and making little playful bites at his stout
doublet.

"Now, sir," cried Mary angrily, "I have my whip, and if you do not leave
the pony's head directly, and come round to the back, I'll beat you."

"Nay, not you," said the boy, without looking round.  "Why, if I did,
the pony would only turn about and follow me."

"He would not."

"There, then, see," said the boy; and slipping out his arm, he turned
and walked back, the pony pivoting round directly.  "Told you so," said
Dummy, and he resumed his old place, with his arm through the rein.

"You told him to turn round, sir."

"Nay, never spoke to him, Miss Mary.--There, it aren't no good to be
cross with me; I shan't leave you till you're safe home."

The girl, flushed with passion, leaned forward, and struck the lad
sharply over the shoulders three times.

"There, sir," she cried; "what do you say to that?"

"Thank ye," replied the boy coolly.  "Frighten away the flies."

Whish-whish-whish, came the whip through the air.

"Now then," cried Mary; "what do you say now?"

"Hit harder, mistress," said the boy, with a chuckle; "that only
tickles."

"Oh!" cried Mary, in a burst of passion.  "I did like you, Dummy, but
you're a nasty, ugly old thing;" and she subsided in her saddle, sobbing
with vexation, while Dummy rounded his shoulders a little more, and
plodded on in silence, with the pony's shoes tapping the stony path, as
it playfully kept on making little bites at different parts of the boy's
clothes.

"'Taren't no use to be cross with me, mistress," said the boy at last.
"Can't help it.  You don't know, and I do.  S'pose he runs off again,
and Master Mark says to me, `Why didn't you lead her home?' what am I to
say?"

Mary sat gazing straight before her, and had to ride ignominiously back
to the zigzags leading up to the top of the Black Tor, where she
dismounted, and Dummy led the pony to its underground stable.

"I shan't tell Master Mark," said the boy to the pony, as he took off
bridle and saddle; "and you can't, Ugly; and she won't neither, so
nobody'll never know."



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

MASTER RAYBURN ADVISES.

Captain Purlrose and his merry men had found a place just to their
liking, where they lived like pigs in a hole of the earth, and as
voraciously.  He chuckled and crowed as they ate and drank, and waited
till their stock of provisions began to grow low, and then started off
upon a fresh expedition, to gather tribute, as he called it.  He did not
expose himself to any risks, but kept his ascendancy over his men by
sheer cunning and ability in making his plans, leading them to where
they could come quite unexpectedly upon some lonely cottage or
farmhouse, ill-use and frighten the occupants nearly to death, adding
insult to injury by loading the spoil of provisions, or whatever it
pleased them to take, on the farmer's horses, leading them away, and
after unloading them at the cave, setting them adrift.

The captain laughed at all threats, for he felt that no one would dare
to follow him to his stronghold; and if an attack were made, he knew
that he could easily beat it off.  The only two people near who were at
all likely to trouble him were his old captain, Sir Morton Darley, and
Sir Edward Eden.

"And they'll talk about it, and and threats, and never come."

He seemed to be right, for as report after report of raids being made,
here and there in the neighbourhood of the two strongholds reached their
owners, Sir Morton Darley would vow vengeance against the marauders, and
then go back to his books; and Sir Edward Eden would utter a vow that he
would hang Captain Purlrose from the machicolations over the gateway at
the Black Tor, and then he would go into his mining accounts, and hear
the reports of his foreman, Dan Rugg, about how many pigs there were in
the sty--that is to say, pigs of lead in the stone crypt-like place
where they were stored.

And so time went on, both knights having to listen to a good many
upbraidings from Master Rayburn, who visited and scolded them well for
not combining and routing out the gang from their hole.

"I wish you would not worry me, Rayburn," said Sir Morton one day, in
Ralph's presence.  "I don't want to engage upon an expedition which must
end in bloodshed.  I want to be at peace, with my books."

"But don't you see that bloodshed is going on, and that these ruffians
are making the place a desert?"

"Yes," said Sir Morton, "it is very tiresome.  I almost wish I had taken
them into my service."

"And made matters worse, for they would not have rested till you had
made war upon the Edens."

"Yes," said Sir Morton, "I suppose it would have been so."

"Why not get the men quietly together some night, father, and if I went
round, I'm sure I could collect a dozen who would come and help--men
whose places have been robbed."

"That's right, Ralph; there are people as much as twenty miles away--
twelve men?  Five-and-twenty, I'll be bound."

"Well, I'll think about it," said Sir Morton; and when Master Rayburn
walked home that day, Ralph bore him company part of the way, and
chatted the matter over with him.

"I'm getting ashamed of your father, Ralph, lad.  He has plenty of
weapons of war, and he could arm a strong party, and yet he does
nothing."

"I wish he would," said the lad.  "I don't like the idea of fighting,
but I should like to see those rascals taken."

"But you will not until your father is stirred up by their coming and
making an attack upon your place."

"Oh, they would not dare to do that," cried Ralph.

"What! why, they are growing more daring day by day; and mark my words,
sooner or later they'll make a dash at the Castle, and plunder the
place."

"Oh!" ejaculated Ralph, as he thought of his sister.

"I wish they would," cried the old man angrily, "for I am sick of seeing
such a state of things in our beautiful vales.  No one is safe.  It was
bad enough before, with the petty contemptible jealousies of your two
families, and the fightings between your men.  But that was peace
compared to what is going on now."

"Don't talk like that, Master Rayburn," said Ralph warmly.  "I don't
like you to allude to my father as you do."

"I must speak the truth, boy," said the old man.  "You feel it now; but
some day, when you are a man grown, and your old friend has gone to
sleep, and is lying under the flowers and herbs and trees that he loved
in life, you will often think of his words, and that he was right."

Ralph was silent.

"I am not a man of war, my boy, but a man of peace.  All the same,
though, whenever either your father or young Mark Eden's arms his men to
drive these ruffians out of our land, I am going to gird on my old
sword, which is as bright and sharp as ever, to strike a blow for the
women and children.  Yes, for pretty Minnie Darley, and Mary Eden too.
For I love 'em both, boy, and have ever since they were bairns."

Ralph went back home to Cliff Castle, thinking very deeply about the old
man's words, and wishing--and planning in a vague way--that he and Mark
Eden could be friendly enough to act in some way together without the
help or knowledge of their fathers, and make an attack upon these men,
so as to put an end to a state of things which kept all women-kind
prisoners in their homes, and the men in a state of suspense as to when
next they should be attacked and plundered of all they had.

It was only natural that Master Rayburn should talk in an almost similar
way to Mark Eden and his father, but only for Sir Edward to promise and
not perform.  And one day the old man actually took Ralph's idea, and
said suddenly to Mark:

"Look here, young fellow, why don't you take the bit in your teeth,
collect your men quietly, get Ralph Darley to do the same, and you boys
go together and thrash those ruffians out, kill them, or take them
prisoners.  Old as I am, I'll come and help."

"Yes, why not?" cried Mark eagerly.  "No," he said directly; "the
Darleys would not and could not join us even if I were willing; and I'm
not."

Old Master Rayburn's words went deeper into the breasts of the two lads
than they knew.  Their natures were in those early days rather like
tinder, and in his angry flint and steely way, the old man had struck a
spark into each, which lay there latent, waiting to be blown into a hot
glow; and who should perform that office but Captain Purlrose himself?

It was in this way.  One bright morning, Sir Edward was examining a
young partly-broken horse that had been reared in the pastures across
the river, and expressed himself delighted with its appearance.

"What do you say to it, Mark?" he cried.  "Not strong enough to carry
me, but I should think it would suit Mary exactly."

"Couldn't be better, father," said the lad, though he felt a little
disappointed, for he half expected that his father would have given it
to him.

"Call her, then, and she shall try it.  And by the way, Mark, there is
that other--that chestnut--which will do for you."

The lad flushed with pleasure, for he had fully believed that his father
intended the handsome, strongly made chestnut for his own use.  Mary
Eden was fetched, came out, and tried the gentle, slightly-built
palfrey, and the chestnut was brought too, proving everything that could
be desired.

"There!" said Sir Edward, after their paces had been tried in one of the
meadows; "now you are both better mounted than any young people in the
Midlands, so go and have a good round together, and get back well before
dark.  Don't distress the horses, and go right away, and make a round to
the west, so as not to go near Ergles.  Not that the scoundrels would
dare to attack you."

Ten minutes after, brother and sister were riding slowly along the track
on the other side of the river, Mary enjoying the change after being
shut up for some weeks; and in consequence, the round was extended to a
greater distance than the pair had intended.  It was getting toward
dark, and they were approaching one of the narrow ravines through which
the river ran, one which hardly gave room for the horse track as well,
when Mary said merrily:

"You must take the blame, Mark, for we shall not be home by dusk."

"Oh yes, we shall," he replied.  "Once we are through these rocks, we'll
cut right across country, and--who are those people in front?"

"Carriers, with pack horses and donkeys," said his sister; "and they
have heavy loads too."

Mark looked long and hard at the party, which was partly hidden by the
trees, and then agreed with his sister.

"Yes," he said; "the horses are loaded with sacks of corn seemingly."

The people with their stores of provender were some distance ahead, and
Mark thought no more of them, for, soon after, his attention was taken
up by a group of men behind them a few hundred yards, walking, and
coming on hurriedly, as if to overtake them.

"Let's ride on faster, Mary," he said rather quickly.

"Why?  What is the matter?"

"Nothing now; only I don't quite like the look of the men behind."

"Not robbers, are they?"

"Oh no, I think not; only we hear so much about Captain Purlrose's men,
it sets one thinking that every man one sees is a marauder.  But it
would not matter if they were; we could soon leave them behind."

They rode on, entering the straits, as the place was called from the
river contracting, as it did in several other places, and running
between two upright walls of rock.  The men were some distance behind,
and they had ceased to trouble about them, when, to Mark's
consternation, on passing round one of the curves in the track, he found
that there in front the narrowest part was blocked by the horses with
their loads; and a something in the aspect of the party of men in charge
of the laden beasts slightly startled him, for he thought them
suspiciously like some of Purlrose's followers.

The next minute he was awake to the fact that they were in danger, for
from behind a block of stone a slight figure, whose hands were bound
with cords, and who made Mark stare, suddenly started to his side,
shouting:

"Ride for it! ride!  You are in a trap."

There was no time for hesitation.  Two men dashed after the prisoner
they had made, and in another instant they would have had him, but for
Mark's quick movement.  He caught his sister's rein, touched his horse's
side with the spurs, and the two active animals sprang between the men
and their quarry as they were sharply turned.

"Lay hold of my nag's mane, Darley," he shouted to the prisoner, who
held up his bound hands, and caught at the dense mass of hair,
succeeding in holding on, while Mark now drew his sword.

"Oh Mark!" cried his sister, "is there any danger?"

"Not if you sit fast," he cried.--"Can you keep up if we canter?"

"Try," said the prisoner excitedly.  "If not, go on, and save
yourselves."

The horses broke into a sharp canter, keeping well together, as the men
they had seen following them with drawn swords, and joined up across the
narrow way, shouted to them to stop.

Mark's reply to this was a yell of defiance.

"Sit fast, Mary," he cried.  "They must go down before your horse."

The girl made no answer, but crouched lower in her saddle, as they rode
on, Mark in his excitement pressing home his spurs, and causing his
horse to make a frantic leap.  But there was no collision; the men
leaped off to right and left to avoid the charge, and the next moment
they were behind.

"Well done!" cried Mark excitedly.  "Well done, six!  Ah!--Here, canter
on, Mary.  I'll soon overtake you."

He checked and turned his own steed, to dash back, for he had suddenly
found that the bound given when he used his spurs was too much for Ralph
Darley's hold on the mane, and he had turned, to see the lad lying in
the track with the men about to seize him and drag him away.

Without a moment's hesitation, Mark charged at the enemy again, and as
they fled he chased them, sword in hand, for some little distance before
once more turning to rejoin Ralph, who had struggled to his feet, ready
to cling once more to the horse's mane, a task made more easy by Mark
cutting through the bonds with his sword.

Mary was waiting a little farther back, and the trio had to go back some
distance to reach a fresh track across country, the enemy making no sign
of pursuit, but getting on with their plunder.

"They completely deceived me," Ralph told his companions.  "I took them
for carriers."

"Ah! as I did," said Mark grimly.

"And when it was too late, I saw my mistake, for they seized and bound
me, and," added the lad bitterly, "they have got my sword and belt."

Ralph walked by his companions almost in silence the rest of the time
that they were together, both Mark and his sister appearing troubled by
his presence, and it seemed a great relief to all when a path was
reached which would enable Ralph to reach Cliff Castle, the others
having some distance farther to go to reach an open part passable by
their steeds.

"I thank you, Master Mark Eden," he said quietly; and then, raising his
cap to Mary Eden, he leapt over the stones which led to the top of a
slope, and soon disappeared from their sight.

"What were you thinking, Mark?" said Mary, breaking the silence at last.

"That this would not be a bad place if we had no enemies.  What were you
thinking?"

"Plenty of things," said the girl sadly.

"Well, tell me some."

"I'm tired, and hungry, and thirsty.  It will soon be dark.  Father will
be angry because we have been so long; and I am getting frightened."

"What of?" said Mark sharply.

"Of meeting with the robbers again."

"I should almost like to," cried Mark fiercely.

"Oh Mark!" cried the girl in dismay.

"Well, if you were not here," he said, with a laugh.

"It's getting too bad.  Once upon a time there was only the Darleys to
mind.  Now these people--this Captain Purlrose and his men--seem to
belong to the land, and father will not fight them.  Oh, if I only were
master, what I would do!  There, canter, and let's get home.  I want to
think."

Home was reached, and Sir Edward made acquainted with the encounter, at
which he frowned, but said very little that night, except once, when he
suddenly broke out petulantly:

"It seems, Mark, as if you were always running against this boy of
Darley's.  Have the goodness in future to go some other way."



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

A COUNCIL OF WAR.

"How can I help it?" said Mark one morning, as he was sauntering down by
the river.  "I did not mean to meet him, and here he is again.  Hallo!
he has got a fresh sword."

The lad instinctively clapped his hand to his side, to feel if he had
his own buckled on, though of late, consequent upon the troubled state
of the country round, he had never thought of stirring without it.

"Mark Eden!" said Ralph to himself, as he caught sight of his enemy.
"Then I suppose now it is going to be our fight.  Very well: it is none
of my seeking, and I don't think we shall have Captain Purlrose to stop
it."

They came to a stand about a yard apart, and delivered themselves each
of a short nod, but for some moments neither spoke.

"Well," said Mark at last, "are you ready?"

"Yes," replied Ralph; "here or somewhere among the trees."

"Of course.  We don't want to be seen."

They walked off side by side till they reached a patch of grass, fairly
level and free from stones, where they flung their caps on the ground,
and drew their swords; a dove high up in view of the cliff breaking out,
as if ironically, with a soft, gentle coo.  But their minds were too
much occupied with war to think of the bird of peace.  Then all at once
Mark rested his point upon the toe of his high boot.

"Look here," he said; "if I stop to say something now, will you promise
me that you will not think it an excuse to keep from fighting?"

"Let me hear what it is," said Ralph coldly; and Mark flushed and raised
his point again.

"No!" he cried.  "Yes: I will say it, and you may think I'm a coward if
you like.  I don't care."

"What is it?" said Ralph, making a dimple on the toe of his boot with
his sword point.

"Well, it's this," said Mark; "and mind, I'm speaking to you as an
enemy."

"Of course," said Ralph.

"Old Master Rayburn said to me, that as my father did not put a stop to
the doings of this Captain Purlrose, I ought to do it."

"That's exactly what he said to me."

Mark hesitated for a moment or two, and then, as if speaking with an
effort, he blurted out:

"And thought I ought to join you, each getting together some men, and
going and taking the ruffians by surprise."

"Yes; and he said all that to me."

"Oh!  Well, it's quite impossible for us to fight together as friends,
isn't it?"

"Quite," cried Ralph.

"We did once, though," suggested Mark.

"Yes, so we did.  Well, couldn't we again if we tried?"

"I don't know," said Mark thoughtfully.  "We should have to do it in
secret if we did."

"Oh yes; nobody must know, or it would be stopped."

"Well, I've thought a deal about it.  What do you say?  Shall we try?"

"I will, if you will."

"And you won't think I don't want to fight you now?"

"Well, I can't help thinking that.  You don't want to, do you?"

Mark frowned, and was silent for a few moments, before saying hurriedly:

"I want to fight the enemy of my house, but I don't want to fight you in
particular.  You see, it seems strange, after we've fought together
against another enemy."

"It doesn't seem strange to me," said Ralph quietly; "it seems stupid."

"But I'm not afraid."

"I don't think I am," said Ralph.  "I think we showed we were not afraid
when I wounded you."

"I wounded you too," said Mark hotly.

"Yes.  Well, then, don't let's fight this morning."

Mark sheathed his weapon, and Ralph did the same.

"Now then," said the former, "how many men could you get together?"

"Nick Garth, Ram Jennings, and six more."

"Eight," said Mark, flushing proudly.  "I could get Dan Rugg, Dummy
Rugg--he's only a lad, but he's stronger than I am.  Oh yes: and
fourteen more at least."

"That would not be fair.  If you agreed to come and attack the men at
Ergles, you would have to bring eight.  But could you get swords and
pikes for them?"

"Oh yes--for five times as many.  How about yours?"

"We've plenty of arms.  They're old, but very sharp and good."

"And could you depend on your fellows to fight?" said Mark.

"Oh yes," said Ralph, smiling; "they hate these people, and they'd rush
at them like dogs would at wolves."

"So would ours," cried Mark.  "There isn't one of our men who hasn't had
some relative or friend attacked and ill-used or robbed."

"Sixteen and ourselves would be plenty."

"And then there's Master Rayburn."

"No," said Ralph quickly; "he's getting a very old man, and I don't
think he ought to go.  Let's do it all secretly, and make the men vow
not to say a word.  Nobody else must know."

"When would you go?" said Mark, nodding his head in agreement.

"They say you should always strike when the iron is hot."

"Well, it's hot enough now," cried Mark eagerly.  "What do you say to
to-morrow night."

"Why not to-night?" said Ralph.  "I'm willing.  Then we'll go to-night.
What time?"

"It ought to be after our people are gone to bed.  We should have to
come out unknown."

"Yes, I forgot that.  Then it would have to be ten o'clock first, and it
would take us quite an hour to get quietly up to the mouth of the cave."

"Yes, with a lantern under a cloak, and every man a torch," said Ralph.

"Oh, I say, you are good at this sort of thing," cried Mark eagerly.  "I
shouldn't have thought of that."

"We couldn't fight in the dark; we shouldn't know friends from foes."

"We should know our own men, and of course your men would be enemies to
my men; but, of course, we shouldn't want to fight, but to know Purlrose
and his men.  Yes, we must have pitch torches.  I can bring any number
of them, for we use them sometimes in the big parts of the mine, where
the smoke doesn't matter.  Well, it all seems easy enough.  I don't
believe there'll be a door to batter down, only a curtain across to keep
the wind out, and it's a very narrow place, I remember.  I went just
inside once."

"I went in fifty yards or more, with Nick Garth," said Ralph, "and we
had candles.  We were looking for lead, but it was all stone shells."

"Oh, there's no lead there," said Mark confidently.  "We've got all the
lead worth working at the Black Tor."

"Yes, I'm afraid so; but there's a warm spring of water in there, and
from where we stopped, you could hear water running and falling, ever so
far-off."

"But what was it like, as far as you went in?"

"Just as if the mountain had been cracked, and both sides of the crack
matched, only sometimes they were two feet apart, and sometimes twenty
or more, making big chambers."

"Yes; some of our mine's like that," said Mark thoughtfully.  "I say,
enemy: think they set any sentries?"

"No, I don't believe they would."

"Then we'll rout them out; and if we can't do that, we'll drive them
farther in, and pile up big stones at the entrance, and starve them till
they surrender."

"Yes," cried Ralph eagerly, as he looked at his companion with the same
admiration Mark had displayed when he had proposed taking the torches.
"Capital: for the place is so big, that I don't believe we could find
them all.  Yours will be the way."

"Well, I think it is right," said Mark suddenly; "but we must catch old
Purlrose to-night."

"We will if we can," said Ralph.

"Well then, that's all.  It's as easy as easy.  All we've got to do is
to get our best men together, and meet--Ah! where shall we meet?"

"At Steeple Stone, half-way there.  That will be about the same distance
for you to come as for us."

"That's good," cried Mark gleefully.  "But we must have a word to know
each other by.  What do you say to `foes?'"

"Oh, that won't do," said Ralph.  "`Friends?'"

"But we're not friends; we're--we're--what are we."

"Allies," said Ralph quietly.

"Why not that, then?  Yes, of course.  `Allies.'  Can't be better."

"`Allies,' then," said Ralph.

"Well, what next?"

"To get the stuff together to fight with," replied Ralph.

"What, the men?  Yes, of course.  Then we'd better see to it at once."

"Yes, in a very quiet way, so that no one knows," said Ralph.

"And meet at the Steeple Stone about half-an-hour after our people are
gone to bed."

"And the first who are there to wait for the others."

"Oh, of course," cried Mark.  "Fair play; no going first, and doing the
work.  That would mean a fresh quarrel."

"When I fight, I fight fair," said Ralph proudly.

"I didn't mean to doubt it," said Mark apologetically.  "I say: this is
more sensible than for us two to fight now."

"Think so?"

"Yes: oh yes; only, of course, our fight has to come.  Yes, when these
people are cleared off."

"We can't have three sets of enemies," said Ralph gravely; "and I can't
help thinking that if we do not act, they will get more and more daring,
and drive us out."

"Pooh!" said Mark defiantly.

"Ah, I laughed at the idea at first; but they might take Cliff Castle or
Black Tor by surprise some night."

"Well, they might take Cliff Castle," said Mark, in rather a
contemptuous tone, "but not the Black Tor.  And they shan't even try to
take either," he added quickly, as if repenting his words.  "We'll
surprise them, and to-night."

"One moment," said Ralph.  "We must be careful, for it's quite possible
that some of the ruffians may be out on an expedition, and if we met
them in the dark, it might cause a serious mistake."

"We'll settle all that when we meet," said Mark.  "`Allies,' then--
to-night."

"`Allies'--to-night," said Ralph; and after stiffly saluting, in the
style taught by their fencing masters, the two lads separated, each
making for his own home.

Mark's task proved easy.  He went straight to the mine, descended, and
found Dummy.

"Coming to go right through the cave beyond the big waterfall, Master
Mark?" cried the lad eagerly.

"No," replied Mark shortly.  "Where's your father?"

"Right away down the mine, in the new lead, Master Mark," said the lad
in a disappointed tone.  "Aren't you never coming to have a hunt?"

"Oh yes, some day."

"That's what you always say.  There's lots to see and find out.  You
know where that water is."

"Yes: but never mind now."

"But, Master Mark, I'm sure that it comes from the river, where there's
that sink-hole in the narrow, where you see the water turn round and
round."

"Very likely; but here, I must see your father.  Take a light, and go
before me.  Here, Dummy, are there plenty of torches?"

"Yes, Master Mark; but what do you want with torches?"

"Don't ask questions, sirrah."

"Very well, Master Mark," said the boy, so meekly that his young master
was touched, and said gently:

"Look here, Dummy, can I trust you?"

"I dunno, Master Mark.  I'll do what you tell me."

"That's right.  Will you fight?"

The boy's eyes flashed in the candle-light, down in the grim chamber
were they stood.

"Torches--fight," he whispered.  "Are you going to tackle the Darleys?"

"No; the robbers."

"T'other's best; and they're robbers too.  But them'll do.  Want me to
come and help fight them?"

"Yes; will you?"

"Will I?" said the boy, showing his teeth.  "I'll follow you anywhere,
Master Mark."

"Well, I want to follow you now.  Take me to your father, and--not a
word to a soul."

Dummy slapped his mouth, and shut it close; then going to a niche in the
rock, he pointed to a box of candles, and a much bigger one, which he
opened and showed to be quite full of long sticks of hempen tow soaked
in pitch, one of which he took out, and gave to Mark, and took one
himself, lit it, and then led the way down, and in and out among the
darkest recesses of the mine.

"Smoky," said Dummy, giving his torch a wave, and sending the black
curls of fume eddying upward, to hang along the stone ceiling.  Then he
uttered an angry cry.

"What's the matter?"

"Hot pitch, Master Mark.  Big drop splathered on to my hand."

In due time the place where Dan Rugg was working and directing the men,
chipping out the rich lead ore, was reached, and he came out of the
murky place.

"Ah, Master Mark," he said.  "You, Dummy, put your foot on that smoky
link.  Want to smother us?"

"My fault, Dan," cried Mark.  "Come here."

He communicated a part of the plan, and the miner's stern face began to
relax more and more, till he showed his yellow teeth in a pleasant grin,
and put his sharp pick under his arm, so as to indulge in a good rub of
his hands.

"The varmin!" he said.  "The varmin!  Time it were done, Master Mark.
Oh yes, I'll pick out some lads who owe 'em a grudge, same as I do.  You
want eight of us?  Me and seven more?"

"You and Dummy, and six more."

"Dummy!  Tchah!  He's no good."

Dummy silently dug his elbow into his master's ribs, but it was
unnecessary.

"I want you and Dummy, and six men," said Mark decisively.

"Oh, very well, sir; you're young master; but what you can see in that
boy I don't know.  Nine on us," he continued thoughtfully.  "Twelve o'
them.  'Taren't enough, master."

Mark hesitated.  He had not meant to speak of his allies, for fear of
opposition, but concluded now that it would be better, and explained
everything.

"No, Master Mark; won't do, sir," said Dan, shaking his head ominously.
"No good can't come o' that.  They'll be running away, and leaving us in
the lurch."

"Nonsense.  Eight men will be picked who, as you say, owe the ruffians a
grudge, and they'll fight well."

"But they'd rather fight us, master, same as us would rather fight
them."

"Not this time, Dan.  We must join hands with them, and beat the
robbers.  Another time we may fight them."

There was a low savage snarl.

"What do you mean by that, Dummy?" cried Mark.

"You didn't tell me that Darley's boy was coming to fight alongside o'
you, Master Mark."

"Then I tell you now, Dummy," said Mark haughtily.  "We've joined
together to crush the robbers; so hold your tongue."

"Ay, he'd better," growled Dan.  "Well, Master Mark, I don't quite like
it; but if you say it's to be done, why, done it shall be."

"And you'll make the men you choose be secret?"

"Why, master?  Of course Sir Edward knows?"

"Not a word; and he is not to know till we bring in the prisoners."

"Whee-ew!" whistled the old miner; and then he chuckled.  "Well," he
said, "you have growed up a young game-cock!  All right, Master Mark.
We'll come; only you must bear all the blame if the master don't like
it.  You order me to do this?"

"Yes, I order you," said Mark firmly.  "It is time it was done."

"That's so, Master Mark, and that's enough.  I begin to feel as if I
should like a fight."

"And you shall have it.  I'll be outside, by the horse-stone, with eight
swords, eight pikes, and eight belts."

"That's good, master; but we must bring our picks as well.  We can
handle them better than other tools."

"Very well.  You leave your lads down at the bottom, and come up with
Dummy to fetch the arms; and mind this: I want to show up well before
the Darleys.  You'll pick fine trusty lads who can fight?"

"You leave that to me, Master Mark," said the old miner.  "I'm proud of
our family as you are.  They shan't have eight fellows as can equal us,
'cepting me and that stoopid boy."

"Don't you mind what he says, Dummy," cried Mark laughingly; "he doesn't
mean it.  There, come along.  I want you to help me pick out some good
sharp swords and pikes.  Mind, Dan, I shall be waiting for you as soon
as the last light's out."

"I shall be there, Master Mark," replied the old miner; and the two lads
returned to daylight, along the passages sparkling with crystals and
bits of ore.

Meanwhile, Ralph was as busy arranging with the retainers at Cliff
Castle, and as soon as he had taken Nick Garth into his confidence, that
gentleman lay down on the ground, and hid his face.

"Why, what does that mean?" cried the lad.

"Couldn't help it, sir.  'Bliged to, or I should have shouted for joy.
Get seven more?  Have a dozen, sir, or twenty.  Every man-jack'll want
to go."

"No: seven," said Ralph firmly.  "There'll be nine from the Black Tor,
so we shall be eighteen."

"What! nine o' them coming to help, Master Ralph!" cried Nick, whose jaw
dropped in his astonishment.

"Yes: they are as much at enmity with the rascals as we are."

"But, Master Ralph--"

"Now, no arguing, Nick; do as I tell you.  Get Ram Jennings, and six men
who have been injured by the gang, and I'll have swords and pikes ready
at ten.  Not a word to a soul."

"Isn't the chief coming?"

"No: I am the chief to-night, and my father will not know."

"But what'll he say to me?"

"Nothing.  I take all the blame."

"But he'll be mad about our going with a lot o' Black Torers."

"I tell you I am answerable for everything."

"Yes, but--"

"Look here, Nick: do you want to rout out Captain Purlrose and his
gang?"

"Do I want to, Master Ralph?  Do I want to get his head under a stone,
and sarve it like I would a nut?  Yes, I doos."

"Then pick the men.  Bind them to be silent, and meet me as soon as the
lights are all out.  Will you do this?"

"Won't I?" said the man exultantly; "and won't we?--Master Ralph, sir, I
am proud on you.--Well, this is going to be a treat!  But, say, Master
Ralph, will them Edens fight 'longside of us without being nasty?"

"Yes, because it's against a common enemy," said the lad.

"Common?  They just are, sir.  Commonest muck o' men.  Fit for nothing
but putting under ground.  Why, how I should like to take my old mother
with us, and let her loose at that there captain.  I wouldn't give much
for his chance.  Shall I tell her?"

"No!" cried Ralph.  "Not a soul.  Everything must be done in secret, and
the rascals up at Ergles taken by surprise."

"You trust me, Master Ralph," said the man; "and when Master Captain
Purlrose finds who's come, he will be surprised.  We'll hang him for a
scarecrow at once, of course?"

"No: bring him here a prisoner, and my father will settle that."

"Very well, sir.  We'll take him, dead or alive oh; but if I had my way,
I'd like to turn him over to my mother and all the women him and his
have robbed.  Why, do you know, sir, night afore last the beggars
carried off a pickle-tub and two feather beds.  And they call themselves
men."

Nick Garth spat on the ground in his disgust, closed one eye as he
looked at his young master, gave his mouth a sounding slap, and went
round at once to garden, stable, and barns, to quietly enlist the little
force, making each man swear secrecy, so that at nightfall not another
soul save the initiated had the slightest inkling of what was going on,
either at Cliff Castle or the Black Tor.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

ALLIED FORCES.

The crescent moon sank like a thin curve of light in the western sky
soon after nine o'clock that night.  At ten the last light disappeared
at both places connected with the adventure, when Mark Eden lowered
himself from his window on to the top of the dining-hall bay, and from
thence to the ground.

Soon after, there was a faint whispering and chinking, and three dark
figures, carrying swords and pikes, descended the steep zigzag to the
bottom of the great tongue of rock, where six men were lying down
waiting; and a few minutes later, all well-armed, they were tramping in
single file through the darkness toward Steeple Stone.  Their young
leader, armed only with his sword, and wearing a steel morion of rather
antiquated date, which could only be kept in place by a pad formed of a
carefully folded silk handkerchief, was at their head; and in obedience
to his stern command, not a word was spoken as they made for the
appointed tryst.

A similar scene had taken place in the dry moat of Cliff Castle; and at
the head of his little party of eight, Ralph Darley was silently on his
way to the Steeple Stone, a great rugged block of millstone-grit, which
rose suddenly from a bare place just at the edge of the moor.

The night was admirable for the venture, for it was dark, but not too
much so, there being just enough light to enable the men to avoid the
stones and bushes that lay in their way, which was wide of any regular
path or track.

Ralph's heart throbbed high with excitement, and in imagination he saw
the gang of ruffians beaten and wounded, secured by the ropes he had had
the foresight to make Nick Garth and Ram Jennings bring, and dragged
back at dawn to the Castle to receive the punishment that his father
would measure out.

He was a little troubled about that, for he felt that it was possible
some objection might be raised by Mark Eden; and he was also a little
uneasy about the first encounter of the two little bands of men so
hostile to one another.  But his followers were amenable to discipline,
and one and all so eager for the fray, that he soon forgot all about
these matters in the far greater adventure to come, and marched steadily
on, keeping a bright look out, till he was nearing the solitary rock.

"See any one, Nick?" he whispered to his head man.

"No, sir.  All as still and lonesome as can be."

"Then we are first," whispered Ralph.  "I am glad.  We'll march close
up, and then crouch down round the stone till the others come."

Nick grunted; and they tramped softly on over the grass and heath, with
all looking grim and strange, the utter stillness of the night out there
adding to the solemnity of the scene.

But they had not taken half-a-dozen paces toward the block, seen dimly
against the starless sky, when there was a sharp chink, and a familiar
voice cried:

"Who goes there?"

"`Allies,'" said Ralph promptly.

"Halt!" cried the leader.

"Advance!" came back; and directly after, the two lads were face to
face, comparing notes.

"Began to think you were Purlrose's men," whispered Mark.

"And I that you had not come."

"Been here some time, and the lads are all lying down.  Now then, what
are our plans?  I want to get to work."

"March together in single file, about five yards apart, straight for the
cave.  Get within fifty yards, halt, and let two advance softly to
reconnoitre."

"Can't do better," said Mark softly.  "But we must keep very quiet, in
case any of them are out marauding."

"Yes, of course.  When we get up to the mouth of the cave, we must halt
on one side, light our torches, and rush in.  We must leave it to the
men then."

"Oh yes; they'll do it.  They've all got their blood up.  We must
succeed."

"But what about the torches?"

"Got plenty for both, and two men have got mine lanterns alight under
their gaberdines.  Better pass round torches for your men now."

Ralph agreed that this would be best, and Mark summoned Dummy with a
faint bird-like chirrup, and made him bring the links.

Then at a word, Mark's men sprang up, and after marking down the spot
below the dimly-seen top of the mountain-limestone ridge, beneath which,
half-way down, as they well knew, the cavern lay, the two parties
marched on in silence side by side, pausing every few minutes, in
response to a shrill chirp, while the leaders took a few paces ahead to
make a keen observation and whisper a few words.

"All still," said Ralph, after the last of these pauses, which took
place where the slope had grown steep, and they had about a quarter of a
mile to go upward to reach the entrance to the cavern.

"Are you sure we're aiming right?" whispered Mark.

"Certain.  The hole is below that sharp point you can see against the
sky.  I remember it so well.  Saw it when the men had surrounded us, and
the captain was making signs."

"Keep on, then," whispered Mark.  "Let's get one on each side of the
mouth, light our torches, and rush in.  We'll go in side by side, and
the men must follow as they can."

The march upward in the darkness was resumed almost without a word, but
no regular lines could be kept to now, on account of the blocks of stone
projecting, rough bushes, and cracks and deep crevices, which became
more frequent as they progressed.  Then, too, here and there they came
upon heaps of broken fragments which had fallen from above, split away
by the frosts of winter.

Hearts beat high from excitement and exertion, for the slope grew more
steep now, and an enemy would have been at great advantage above them,
if bent on driving them back.

But all remained still: there was no warning of alarm uttered by sentry,
no shrill whistle; and so utterly death-like was all around, that Ralph
whispered to Mark, who was close beside him now:

"I believe they must be all out on some raid."

"Seems like it," whispered back Mark; and they paused to let their men
get close up, for the entrance could now dimly be made out, some twenty
yards higher.

"Better take your lantern," whispered Mark.  "Then give the word after
you are up, on one side, and we the other.  We must go in at once then,
for the light will startle them if they're there."

The lantern, carefully shaded, was passed to Nick Garth, and once more
they pressed on, the men spreading out a little on either side now, so
as to get level with the entrance, which gradually grew more plain, in
the shape of a narrow cleft, little more than wide enough to admit one
at a time; and they saw now that stones had been roughly piled beneath
it to form a rough platform in front.

Still no sound was heard, and the next minute the two little groups
clustered in their places close by the platform; Ralph gave the word,
the lanterns were bared, and thrown open, and three links at a time
thrust in, to begin burning, though not so quickly as their owners
wished, while men stood on either side with pikes levelled, ready to
receive the enemy should a rush be made from inside.

It was a picturesque scene, as the light from the lanterns gleamed dimly
upon eager faces, and lit up the bright steel weapons.  Then, one after
the other, the torches began to burn and send upward little clouds of
pitchy smoke, the light growing brighter and brighter, and throwing up
the grey stones and darkening the shadows, till all were armed with a
blazing light in their left hands, and sword or pike in their right,
while between the two parties the mouth of the cave lay dark and
forbidding, but silent as the grave.

"Ready?" whispered Ralph.

"Ready!" came from Mark.

"Then forward!" cried the former, and, sword in hand, the two lads
stepped from right and left on to the platform, their shadows sent first
into the dark rift; while the Ruggs crowded after Mark, and Nick Garth
and Ram Jennings shouldered them in their effort to keep their places
close behind Ralph.

"Hang the link!" cried Mark suddenly.  "Here, Darley, do as I do."

He threw his flaming torch right forward into the cave as far as it
would go, and it struck against the wall and dropped some dozen yards
in, and lay burning and lighting up the rugged passage.

"I'll keep mine till we get past yours," said Ralph in a hoarse whisper;
and the lads pressed in, side by side, to find that the link was burning
at an abrupt corner, the passage turning sharply to the right.

Mark stopped and picked up his link, but before he could throw it again,
Ralph stepped before him over the rugged floor and hurled his light, to
see it fall right ahead, after also striking against the wall.

"Zigzags," said Mark in a sharp whisper.  "Here, mind what you're doing
with those pikes."

"All right," was growled, but the men who held the weapons did not
withdraw them, two sharp points being thrust right forward, so as to
protect the two leaders, the holders being Dan Rugg and Nick Garth.
Both Mark and Ralph objected to this again, but it was no time for
hesitation.  At any moment they might be attacked, and they were all
wondering that they had heard nothing of the enemy, all being singularly
still, save a low murmuring sound as of falling water at a distance.

"They must be all out," said Mark in a low voice.  "Gone on some raid.
Well, we shall catch them when they come back."

Chirp!

"Who did that?" said Ralph quickly, at the sound of a steel weapon
striking against the rock.

But no one answered; and as they advanced slowly, and Mark stooped to
pick up his burning link once more where it lay against the corner of
the natural passage, Ralph seized the opportunity to change his sword to
his left hand, and swing his round the corner out of sight.

They heard it fall, and the glow struck against the wall to their left,
lighting up the passage beyond the corner.

"Take care, Master Mark," whispered Dan Rugg.

"Ay, and you too, Master Ralph," whispered Nick Garth.  "P'r'aps they're
lying wait for us."

"No," said Mark, aloud.  "They're away somewhere, and I hope they
haven't seen our lights."

Whizz--thud!

There was an involuntary start from the attacking party, for at that
moment the burning link Ralph had thrown came sharply back, struck
against the wall where the glow had shone just before, and dropped,
blazing and smoking, nearly at their feet.

"That settles it," said Mark excitedly.

"Yes, and that explains the chink I heard.  They're waiting for us.
Ready?  We must charge."

Ralph's words were followed by the pressing forward of the men behind--
those of each family being eager to prove their valour by being before
their rivals; and the next minute half-a-dozen were round the corner,
with the two lads at their head, to find that the passage had suddenly
widened out into a roomy chamber, toward whose high roof the smoke from
the torches slowly ascended, and contracted again at the end, about a
dozen yards away.

"Yes, I remember," whispered Ralph.  "I had forgotten: it goes off in a
passage round to the left again at that corner."

The men crowded in after them, finding ample room now, and all looked
about, puzzled, for the enemy who had hurled back the link, several of
those present being ready to place a strange interpretation upon the
mystery.

But the explanation was plain enough when they reached the end of the
chamber, where the onward passage was but a crack some two feet wide,
with a bristling palisade of pike-heads to bar their further progress.
There was no hesitation.  At the sight of something real to attack, Mark
uttered a shout.

"Here they are, lads," he cried.  "Now for it!  Pikes."

The men, Edenites and Darleyites, closed in together, forgetting all
their animosities, and their pike-heads gathered into a dense mass,
clashing against those which bristled in the narrow opening, clinked
against the stone sides, and rattled, as the holders thrust and stabbed
away past their young leaders' shoulders, for, to their great disgust,
both Mark and Ralph found that they could do nothing with their swords.

And now the silence which had reigned was further broken by the excited
cries of the men, given at every thrust they made into the opening,
their attack eliciting yells of defiance, oaths, and threats of what
would be done directly.

The fight went on for a few minutes, with apparently no effect on either
side, the attacking party being unable to reach the defenders, while the
latter seemed to be too much crippled for space to attack in turn,
contenting themselves with presenting their bristling points against the
advance.

"Halt!" cried Mark suddenly.  "This is of no use."

"No," growled Nick Garth, as, in obedience to the order, the men drew
back a couple of yards, to stand, though, with their pikes directed at
the narrow opening.

"Come out, you rats, and fight fair," roared Dan Rugg; and there was a
derisive shout of laughter, which echoed through the chamber, followed
by the hoarse voice of Captain Purlrose.

"Go home, bumpkins!" he shouted, "or we'll spit you all together like
larks."

"Beast!" shouted back Mark; and stepping forward he hurled his link
right in over the pike-heads, amongst their holders, eliciting a series
of thrusts and furious yells, as he took one step back, and fell back
the next.  A savage roar rose from his men, answered by another from
within.

"Hurt, Mark Eden?" cried Ralph excitedly, catching at his brother
leader, and saving him from going down.

"No: feel stupid," panted Mark, who looked confused and dizzy; "point
struck this stupid steel cap;" and he tore it off, and threw it down,
though it had in all probability saved his life; the step back he had
taken, however, had lessened the force of the thrust.  "Better now.--
Here, stop them.  They are doing no good."

For enraged by what had taken place, the attacking party had rushed in
again, to go on stabbing and thrusting away with their pikes, keeping up
a series of rattlings and clashings, till Ralph made his voice heard,
and they drew back, growling angrily, and the weird light shed by the
torches showed that blood had begun to flow from hands and arms.

"We must do something different to this," cried Ralph, as soon as the
yells of derision which greeted their repulse were over.

"Yes, young idiot!  Go home to bed," shouted the captain hoarsely.  Then
he burst into a savage tirade of curses, for Dummy, in his rage at being
right at the back, had thrown another blazing torch straight in over the
bristling pike-heads, lighting up the interior, and showing the savage
faces of the defenders close together.  Ralph judged that the link had
struck the captain.

"Stand fast, men," he whispered.  "We may make them charge out that way.
Go on, Dummy, and half-a-dozen more of you throw in your links all
together."

The order was obeyed, after the torches had been waved into a fierce
blaze, and they flew in, scattering drops of burning pitch, bringing
forth an outburst of yells of rage and pain, and a quick movement showed
that the marauders were about to rush out.  But the voice of Captain
Purlrose was heard thundering out the words:

"Stand fast!  Only a few drops of pitch, and a singe or two.  Here, two
of you, throw them back."  An exchange of burning missiles now took
place for a few minutes, which soon ended on the part of the defenders,
who, roaring with rage and pain, kept on trampling out the torches now
thrown.

"Stop!" cried Mark.  "It's of no good.  The cowards will not come out.
Here, Ralph Darley."

There was a few moments' whispering, resulting in orders being given to
the men, two of the Edens, and two of the Darleys standing aside, ready
for some action.

"Now for another charge," whispered Mark.  "Take as long a hold of your
pikes as you can, and when I give the order, let your points be all
together like one.  Ready?  Forward!"

As the little party advanced, with their pike-heads almost touching,
while those of their enemies were advanced to defend the opening, the
two men on either side darted close up, shielded by the wall, passed
their arms over with a quick motion, and each grasped and held fast one
or two pike-shafts, in spite of the efforts of their holders to get them
free.

But there were enough left to defend the hole, and one by one, in spite
of the desperate efforts made to hold them, the imprisoned weapons were
at last dragged away, to reappear, stabbing furiously, till, breathless
with their exertions, the men once more drew back, several of the Edens
in their rage snatching their small mining-picks from their belts, one
hurling his into the hole, a wild yell telling that it had done its
work.

"Well," said Mark despondently, "what can we do?"

"Wait and see if they will come out and attack us.  We are wasting
strength."

"Yes.  It's no good.  We ought to have brought a lot of blasting-powder,
Dan, and blown them out."

"Yes, Master Mark; but we didn't know.  My advice is that we go back
now, and come again."

"Why, you're hurt," said Ralph excitedly, as he saw the blood streaming
down the man's arm.

"Ah, so's a lot of us, young master," growled the man.  "Look at your
own lads."

Ralph took and raised a torch, and saw that half his own party,
including Nick Garth and Ram Jennings, were suffering from cuts and
stabs in their arms.

"Oh, they're nowt," growled Nick.  "They've got it worse inside.  Now
then, let's go at 'em again, or we shall never do it."

Another yell of defiance came from the passage, followed by mocking
invitations to them to come on again.

"Yah!  You aren't men," roared Ram Jennings.  "Rats, that's what you
are--rats.  Only good to go and fight wi' women."

"It's of no good," said Mark bitterly.  "I feel done.  I haven't had a
single cut or thrust at one of the brutes; neither have you.  We can't
do it."

"I don't like to say so," said Ralph, "but my father was a soldier, and
he said a good officer never wasted his men."

"Well, we're wasting ours," said Mark bitterly, "We must give up, and
come again."

"Stop," whispered Ralph.  "I know.  Give orders to your men quietly, and
I'll do so to mine.  Then we'll throw the torches in at them with all
our might, and give a shout, and retreat as if we were beaten."

"And stop on each side of the mouth to catch them as they pursue us,"
said Mark excitedly, catching at the idea.  "That's it."

The next moment they were hurrying from man to man, who heard them
sulkily, growling and panting in their rage.  But they obeyed their
leaders' orders, getting their remaining links well ablaze, the holders
forming in front, and the rest quietly and quickly filing out by the
other end of the chamber.

"Now!" shouted Ralph suddenly.  "In with them."

There was a rush of light, and the fiery missiles flew in through the
opening, falling amongst the defenders, and leaving the chamber in
comparative darkness, amidst which was heard the quick tramping of feet,
mingled with the yells of rage from the defenders.

The next minute, with Mark and Ralph coming last, all were outside the
mouth of the cavern, grouped in two parties, with presented weapons,
breathing the soft, cool night air, and waiting for the attack of their
foes.

Sound after sound came from the opening, but not such as they longed
with bated breath to hear.  Once there was a loud order which came
rolling out, and a little later a gleam of lights was seen, but no rush
of footsteps, no sign of pursuit; and suddenly a voice broke the silence
of the peaceful night air, as Nick Garth roared out:

"'Taren't likely.  Rats won't show for hours after the dogs have hunted
'em in their holes."

"Ah! might wait for a week," growled Dan Rugg.  "It's all over for
to-night."

"They're right, Eden," whispered Ralph.

"Yes: they're right," said Mark, with a groan.  "We're beaten--beaten,
like a pack of cowards.  Let's go home."

"I did not see much cowardice," said Ralph bitterly.  "But it's all
over, and we must retreat.  Give the word."

"What! to retreat?" cried Mark passionately.  "I'll die first."

"It is not fair to the men to keep them longer."

"Well, you're a soldier's son, and know best, I suppose.  Give the word
yourself."

Ralph hesitated, for his companion's words seemed to be tinged by a
sneer, but he knew that it was madness to stay, and hesitating no
longer, he gave the word to retire.

"We're not going back for your orders," said one of Mark's followers
surlily.

"Yes, you are," cried his young master fiercely.  "Back home now.
March!"

There was a low growling on both sides, but the orders were obeyed, and
slowly and painfully the two parties, stiff with exertion, and smarting
with wounds, filed over the steep stone-besprinkled slope.

As they walked down, the two lads drew closer together, and at last
began to talk in a low voice about their failure.

"Head hurt much?" said Ralph.

"Yes, horribly; and I've left that old iron pot behind.  Air's cool to
it, though."

"Shall I bind it up?"

"No: don't bleed.  I say."

"Yes."

"How are we going to meet our fathers to-morrow morning?  Nice state the
poor lads are in."

Ralph uttered a gasp at the thought of it.  There was no leading
prisoners back in triumph, with their hands bound behind them.  They
were beaten--cruelly beaten, and he was silent as his companion, as they
tramped slowly on, at the head of their men, till the Steeple Stone was
seen looming up ahead, where they would separate, little thinking that
the worst was to come.

The lads halted to listen whether there was any sound of pursuit, and
the men filed slowly by till they were fifty yards ahead, when all at
once voices were heard in altercation, angry words were bandied from
side to side; and spurred by the same feeling of dread, the two leaders
dashed forward again.

Too late!  The smouldering fires of years of hatred had been blown up by
a few gusty words of bitter reproach.  Nick Garth had in his pain and
disappointment shouted out that if the party had been all Darleys the
adventure would have succeeded.

Dan Rugg had yelled back that it was the Darleys who played coward and
hung back; and the next moment, with a shout of rage, the two little
parties were at one another, getting rid of their rage and
disappointment upon those they looked upon as the real enemies of their
race.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

RALPH PLEADS GUILTY.

It was a savage fight, and before Mark and Ralph, who rushed desperately
into the _melee_, not to lead their men, but to separate them, could
succeed in beating down the menacing pikes, several more were wounded;
and at last they drew off, with their burdens greatly increased by
having on either side to carry a couple of wounded men.

"We must put it down to Purlrose," said Mark bitterly, as he ran back
for a moment to speak to Ralph.  "But what do you say--oughtn't we to
have our duel now?"

"If you like," said Ralph listlessly; "Perhaps we'd better, and then I
may be half killed.  My father may be a little merciful to me then."

Mark leaned forward a little, so as to try and make out whether his ally
was speaking in jest or earnest; and there was enough feeble light in
the east to enable him to read pretty plainly that the lad was in deadly
earnest.

"No," he said sharply; "I don't think we'll have it out now.  My head's
too queer, and my eyes keep going misty, so that I can't see straight.
You'd get the best of it.  I don't want to meet my father, but I'd
rather do that than be half killed.  The poke from that pike was quite
enough to last me for a bit."

He turned and trotted off after his men, while Ralph joined his, to hear
them grumbling and muttering together, he being the burden of their
complaint.

Nick Garth and Ram Jennings seemed to be the most bitter against him,
the latter commencing boldly at once.

"Oh, Master Ralph," he cried, "if your father had been here, we should
ha' paid them Edens for hanging back as they did."

"They did not hang back," cried Ralph angrily; "they fought very
bravely."

"What!" cried Nick.  "Well, I do like that.  But I don't care.  Dessay I
shall be a dead 'un 'fore I gets to the Castle, and then we shall see
what Sir Morton will say."

"Well, you will not hear, Nick," said Ralph quietly.

"No: I shan't hear, Master Ralph, 'cause I shall be a dead 'un, I
suppose.  But I'm thinking about my poor old mother.  She'll break her
heart when they carry me to her, stiff as a trout, for I'm the only son
she has got."

This was too much for the wounded men even.  They forgot their
sufferings in the comic aspect of the case, familiar as they all were
with the open enmity existing between Mother Garth and her son, it being
common talk that the last act of affection displayed toward him had been
the throwing of a pot of boiling water at his head.

The laugh lightened the rest of the way, but they were a
doleful-looking, ragged, and blood-stained set, who bore one of their
number upon a litter formed of pike-staves up the zigzag to the men's
quarters at day-break; and Ralph felt as if he had hardly strength
enough to climb back to his window and go to bed, after seeing his
roughly-bandaged men safely in.

But he made the essay, and when half-way up dropped back again into the
garden, just as a thrush began to pipe loudly its welcome to the coming
day; and the blackbirds were uttering their chinking calls low down in
the moist gloom amongst the bushes on the cliff slope.

"Can't leave the poor fellows like that," he muttered.  "Oh dear, how
stiff I am!  Father said he always felt it his duty, when he was a
soldier, to look well after his wounded men."

He stood thinking for a few moments, and then began to tramp down the
steep path to where the shadows were still dark, and a mist hung over
the rippling stream.  Then taking to the track beside it, he trudged on,
with the warm glow in the east growing richer of tint, the birds
breaking out into joyous song, and minute by minute the vale, with its
wreaths of mist, growing so exquisitely beautiful that the black horrors
of the past night began to seem more distant, and the cloud of shadow
resting above his aching head less terrible and oppressive.

And as the sun approached its rising, so did the beauties around the lad
increase; and he tramped on with a sensation of wonder coming upon him,
that with all so glorious at early morn in this world of ours, it should
be the work of the highest order of creatures upon it to mar and
destroy, and contrive the horrors which disfigure it from time to time.

"And I've been one of the worst," he said to himself bitterly.  "No: it
was to stop others from doing these things," he cried quickly.  "Oh, if
we had not failed!"

He quickened his pace now, and, just as the sun rose high enough to
light up the vale with its morning glow, he came in sight of the opening
where Master Rayburn's cottage stood.

"I shall have to wake him up," said the lad, with a sigh; "and oh! what
a tale to tell!"

But he did not have to waken the old man, for as he drew nearer he
suddenly caught sight of his friend, standing with his back to him,
hands clasped and hanging in front, head bent and bare, and the
horizontal rays of the rising sun turning his silver locks to gold.

The lad gazed at him in surprise, but went on softly till he was quite
close up, when Master Rayburn turned suddenly, smiled, and said:

"Ah!  Ralph Darley, my lad, that's how I say my prayers, but I'm a good
Christian all the same.  Why, what brings--here, speak, boy," he cried
excitedly--"torn, covered with dirt--and what's this?--blood?  Oh,
Ralph, boy, don't say that you and Mark Eden have been meeting again."

"Yes," said Ralph slowly; "we parted only a little while ago;" and he
told the old man what had taken place, while the latter eagerly examined
the speaker to seek for hurts.

"Then--then--you two lads--on the strength of what I said--attacked
those ruffians in their den?"

"Yes, Master Rayburn," said the lad bitterly; "and failed--miserably
failed.  Do, pray, come up and see our poor fellows.  One of them is
badly hurt, and the others have nearly all got wounds."

"But you--you, boy.  I don't see the cause of all this blood."

"No," said Ralph wearily.  "I'm not hurt.  I suppose that came through
helping the men."

"Ah! and Mark Eden--is he hurt?"

"No: we two ought to have had the worst of it.  He had a thrust on the
head, but his steel cap saved him, and he walked home."

"But Sir Morton? he did not know you were going?"

"No: we kept it to ourselves."

"He knows now, of course?"

"Nothing at all.  We've only just got back."

"I'll come at once," said the old man; and hurrying into the cottage, he
took some linen and other necessaries, put on his hat, and rejoined the
lad, making him give a full account of the attack and failure as they
walked sharply back to the Castle.

"You don't say anything, Master Rayburn," cried Ralph at last.  "Do you
think we were so very much to blame?"

"Blame, my boy?" cried the old man.  "I always liked you two lads, and,
wrong or right, I think you've done a grand thing."

"What?"

"I never felt so proud of you both in my life."

Ralph smiled.

"That's very good of you, Master Rayburn," he said, "and it's a bit
comforting; but I've got father to meet by-and-by."

"And so have I, my boy," cried the old man warmly, "to take the blame of
it all.  For it was my doing from beginning to end.  I incited you lads
to go and do this, and I shall tell your father it is only what he and
Sir Edward Eden ought to have done months ago."

"But we failed--failed," groaned Ralph dismally.

"Failed!  You have not done all you meant to do, but you have read those
ruffians a severe lesson, and next time--"

"Ah! next time," sighed Ralph.

"Come, Ralph!  Be a man.  Nothing great is ever done without failure
first.  Your father will be angry, and naturally.  He'll scold and
blame, and all that; but I know what he is at heart, and he'll think as
I do, that he need not be ashamed of his son, even if he has failed."

The quarters were reached soon after, and the sufferer who had been
carried back received the first attention, the others all having their
turn; and just as the last bandage had been applied, Sir Morton, who had
been having a walk round, came upon the pikes, stained and blunted,
leaning against a buttress of the wall.  This brought him to the men's
quarters, and in utter astonishment he stood gazing at the scene.

"Ah! good morning," said Master Rayburn, in answer to his wondering look
from his son to the injured men and back.  "They'll be easier now.  Only
one hurt much, and he'll be all right again after a few days' rest."

"But what does this mean?" said Sir Morton; and his son stood out, and
in a frank, manly way, once more related the adventures of the night.

Sir Morton's face grew sterner and harder as he heard everything to the
finish; and he was just about to speak, when Master Rayburn broke in:

"My doing, from beginning to end.  I told them they ought to do it."

"And a nice business your interference has made, sir!" cried Sir Morton
angrily.  "You see now that it is impossible for two such adverse
elements to get on together.  The brutes! to turn upon those who had
been fighting by their side!"

"Are you speaking about your men or Sir Edward Eden's?" said the old man
drily.

"Eden's, of course," cried Sir Morton angrily.

"Six of one and half-a-dozen of the other," said the old man; "and all
due to the evil teaching of their masters, my dear old friend.  Come,
Darley, it's of no use to cry over spilt milk; the boys have set their
fathers a splendid example, and driven in the thin end of the wedge.
The sooner you and Eden send it home the better."

"I must try again."

"Of course.  I don't ask you to make friends.  It would be absurd; but
you must stir now, and I shall tell Eden the same, and that he cannot
for very shame leave the work undone that his son has begun.  Ralph,
lad, you go to bed, and sleep all day.  I am doctor enough to insist to
your father that you are not to be disturbed.  I must go up to the Black
Tor at once, for I suppose I am badly wanted there."

The old man hurried away with the remainder of his bandages, and Sir
Morton signed to his son, who followed him to the room into which
Captain Purlrose had been ushered.

"Now, Ralph," began Sir Morton, but his son interrupted him:

"Guilty, father," he cried dismally, "and I have failed."

"There, do as Master Rayburn said," cried Sir Morton, "and--well--I'll
talk to you another time--I'm--er--I'm not very angry, my boy, but--
there, be off.  It was very brave, and like a soldier's son."

"I wonder what Mark Eden's father has said to him," thought Ralph as he
threw himself wearily upon his bed.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

A CURE FOR THE HEADACHE.

Master Rayburn was anxiously expected at the Black Tor, Mark's first act
having been to send Dummy Rugg down to his cottage to ask him to come
up; and not finding him there, the boy had very bravely followed him to
Cliff Castle, in the full belief that he would be there, and on learning
that he was, he sent a message in, and then hurried away.

Matters went on in a very similar way at the Tor, even to Sir Edward
accidentally finding that something was wrong, and going to the building
at the entrance to the mine, where the wounded men were being attended.
But he did not take matters in the same spirit as his inimical
neighbour, but attacked his old friend furiously, vowed that he would
never forgive him, and threatened his son with the severest punishment,
though he did not say what.

Master Rayburn said nothing, but went on dressing the men's wounds,
till, regularly worked up into a perfect fury, Sir Edward turned upon
him again.  "This ends everything between us, Master Rayburn," he cried.
"I have treated you as a friend, made you welcome at my table, and
allowed my son to make you a kind of companion; but now, have the
goodness to recollect that we are strangers, and if the gang from out of
the cavern yonder attack you, get out of the trouble in the best way you
can, for you will have no help from me."

"Very well," said Master Rayburn quietly.

"And now, sir, leave my place at once."

"Oh no!" said the old man quietly, as Mark looked on, scarlet with
annoyance, but feeling that he must suffer for what had happened.

"Oh no!" cried Sir Edward, aghast.  "Have the goodness to explain what
you mean."

"Certainly," replied the old man.  "I have not finished with this man,
and I have another to attend later on."

"Leave, sir, at once," cried Sir Edward.

"No," replied the old man quietly.  "You are angry, and are saying that
which in calmer moments you will regret.  Those men require my
assistance, and I must insist upon staying."

Sir Edward made an angry gesture.

"Go on, then," he cried; "finish what you have to do, and then leave at
once."

"Yes," replied Master Rayburn calmly; "but it will be necessary for me
to come day after day for quite a week.  This man will need much
attention."

Sir Edward turned and walked angrily out of the place; and as if not a
word had been said, the old man went on with his task until he had
ended.  Then telling the men to be of good heart, for their injuries
were none of them serious, he went to the door with Mark, whose face was
troubled and perplexed.

"There, you need not look like that, my lad," he said.  "Your father's
angry now, but he'll calm down, and I don't think he will say much to
you.  It is more likely that he will want to take revenge upon those
ruffians.  Cheer up, my boy: I'm not angry with you for what you've
done.  It was the fighting afterwards that was the unlucky part."

The old man hurried away, and Mark stood watching him descend the slope.

"Cheer up, indeed!" he muttered; "who's to cheer up at a time like this?
I wish I hadn't listened to that miserable scrub of a Darley.  I always
hated him, and I might have known that associating with him would lead
me into trouble.--Well, what do you want?"

This was to Dummy Rugg, who, like his young master, had escaped without
much damage.

"Only come to talk to you, Master Mark," said the boy humbly.

"Then you can be off.  I don't want to talk."

"I'll talk, then, and you listen, Master Mark," said the boy coolly; and
Mark opened his eyes, and was about to order the lad off, but Dummy went
on quickly.  "I've been thinking it all over," he said.  "That
gunpowder's the thing.  When we go next we'll take a lot in bags.  When
we get there, and they're hiding in that narrow bit, I'll untie the bags
and throw two or three in.  Then we can throw three or four torches, and
one of them's sure to set the powder on fire, and start 'em; then we can
all make a rush."

"Oh, then you think that we shall go again?"

"Oh yes, we must go again, Master Mark.  Why, if we didn't go, the
robbers would think we were afraid, and come at us.  You're not going to
sit down and look as if we were beat?"

"Well, it would be too bad, Dummy," said Mark, thoughtfully.

"Bad?  I should think it would, Master Mark.  I say, wasn't it grand
last night?"

"Grand?"

"Yes; when we were in the cave, with the lights shining, and the pikes
sparkling.  If they had only come out and fought fair, it would have
been splendid."

"Then you would like to go again, Dummy?"

"Of course, sir.  Wouldn't you?"

"Yes, I suppose so," said Mark thoughtfully.

"Yes, you must go again, and take 'em all prisoners.  But I suppose you
won't go to-night?"

"Go to-night?  No!"

"Well, there's nothing going on in the mine to-day.  Father's too sore
to head the men, and he's going to lie down and rest till his arm's
better.  What do you say to having a good long day below there, and
finding which way the river runs--the one we heard?"

"Bah!  Stuff!  Rubbish!  After being up fighting all the night!  You
must be mad."

"No, I aren't," said Dummy.  "I only want you to come.  It'll do you
good.  You don't know how much better you'll feel after a good walk and
climb down there."

"What's the good, Dummy?"

"We want to find out where the water goes to that is always falling.
I'm sure some of it comes out of our river, where the hole's in the
stream."

"And what good will it do to know where the water goes?"

"I don't know, but I want to.  Can't go to work after such a night as we
had.  There's nobody down the mine to-day."

Mark put his hand to the place where he had received the blow.

"Headache, Master Mark?"

"Yes.  All jarred-like."

"Then come down.  I've often had a bad headache when I've gone down into
the mine, and it's been so quiet and still there that it has soon got
better.  Do come, Master Mark; it'll be better than sitting thinking
about being beaten last night."

"Very well, Dummy," said Mark at last: "I don't feel as if I could go to
bed and sleep, and I don't want to be thinking."

"And you'll have too much to do down there to think."

"Yes, I suppose so; and if I stay up, I shall be meeting my father and
catching it.  Oh, I only wish we had won the day."

"Couldn't; 'cause it was night," said the boy thoughtfully.

"Well, be ready with the candles, and I'll come in half-an-hour, as soon
as I've seen how the men are."

"Oh, they're all right, and gone to sleep.  They don't mind.  But you
ought to have let us beat the Darleys, as we didn't beat the robbers."

"You go and get the candles," said Mark sourly.

"Like to have torches too, master?" said the lad, with a cunning grin.

"You speak to me again like that, you ugly beggar, and I won't go,"
cried Mark wrathfully.  "Think I want all that horrible set-out with the
torches brought up again?"

"I'm off to get the candles ready, Master Mark," said Dummy humbly; and
he hurried down the steep steps to get to the mouth of the mine.

"Wish I'd kicked him," muttered Mark, as soon as he was alone.  "I do
feel so raw and cross.  I could fight that Ralph Darley and half-kill
him now.  Here, let's go and see how miserable all the men are; it'll do
me good."

He hesitated about going, though, for fear of meeting his father; but
feeling that it was cowardly, he went to where the men lay now, found
them asleep, and came out again to go into the dining-room and make a
hasty breakfast; after which he went out, descended the steep steps out
in the side of the rock upon which the castle was perched, glanced up at
it, and thought how strong it was; and then came upon Dummy, waiting
with his candle-box and flint and steel, close by the building where the
blasting-powder was kept.

"Let's take these too, Master Mark," he said, pointing to the coils of
rope which had been brought back from the cave; "we may want 'em."

He set the example by putting one on like a baldric, Mark doing the same
with the other.

"Now for a light," he said, taking out his flint, steel, and tinder-box.

"Well, don't get scattering sparks here," said Mark angrily.  "Suppose
any of the powder is lying about, you'll be blowing the place up."

"Not I," said the boy, smiling; "I'm always careful about that."

He soon obtained a glow in the tinder, lit a match, and set a candle
burning.  Then taking each one of the small mining-picks, the two lads
descended into the solitary place, Dummy bearing the light and beginning
to run along cheerily, as if familiarity with the long wandering
passages and gloomy chambers had made them pleasant and home-like.  Mark
followed him briskly enough, for the solemn silence of the place was
familiar enough to him, and he looked upon it merely as a great burrow,
which had no terrors whether the men were at work or no.

Dummy went steadily on, taking the shortest way to the chamber where he
had shown his companion that it was no _cul de sac_, but the entrance to
the grotto where nature had effected all the mining, and at last the
great abyss where the sound of the falling water filled the air was
reached.  Here Dummy seated himself, with his legs swinging over the
edge, and looked down.

"That's where the river water comes in," he said, "through a big crack.
Now let's see where it goes, because it must go somewhere."

"Right into the middle of the earth, perhaps," said Mark, gazing down
into the awful gulf, and listening to the rushing sound.

"Nay," said Dummy; "water don't go down into the earth without coming
out again somewhere.  Dessay if we keep on we shall come out to
daylight."

"Eh?" cried Mark; "then we had better find it and stop it up, for as I
said the other day, we don't want any one to find a back way into our
mine."

"That's what I thought, Master Mark," said Dummy quietly.  "Wouldn't do
for Purlrose and his men to find it, and come in some day, would it?"

"No; that wouldn't do at all, Dummy."

"No, sir.  But how's your head?"

"My head?  Oh, I'd forgotten all about it."

"I know'd you would," said the lad, grinning.  "Don't feel so tired,
neither?"

"No."

"Then I'll light another candle, and we'll get on: but don't you get
slipping while we are going round here, because I don't know how deep it
is, and I mightn't be able to get you out."

"You take care of yourself, and lead on," said Mark shortly.  "I dare
say I can go where you do."

Dummy nodded, and after handing the second candle to his master, he went
along sidewise, and then lowered himself over the edge of the gulf, and
dropped out of sight.

"Only 'bout a fathom, Master Mark," he shouted, "and plenty of room."

Mark did not hesitate, but lowered himself in turn, and dropped upon his
feet, to find they were upon a rugged shelf, about four feet wide,
sloping downward right by the side of the gulf; and passing along this,
they soon reached the other side of the great chasm, to stand nearly
opposite to the end of the passage where they had entered, but about
twenty feet lower; and here they again looked down into the awesome
depths.  But nothing was to be seen.  The water fell from somewhere
beneath where they had entered; and as they judged, plunged deep down
into a wide chasm, and from thence ran out and under the great crack,
which the boy found out as the way they had to go.

"Stream runs right under that, Master Mark.  I went along some way, and
every now an' then I could hear it, deep down.  I say, did you bring
anything to eat?"

"Some bread that I couldn't manage at breakfast."

"So did I," said the boy.  "P'r'aps we may want it by-and-by."

"We want better lights, Dummy," said Mark, after they had progressed
some distance.

The boy turned round with a merry look, and was about to suggest torches
once more, but at a glance from Mark's eyes, he altered his mind and
said:

"Yes, those don't give much."

But pitiful as the light was, it was sufficient for them to see walls
covered with fossils, stalactites hanging from the roofs of chambers,
others joined to the stalagmites on the floor, and forming columns,
curtains, and veils of petrifaction, draping the walls as they went
through passage, hall, and vast caverns whose roofs were invisible.  And
all the time, sometimes plainly, sometimes as the faintest gurgling
whisper, they heard the sound of flowing water beneath their feet.

"Well, this is grand!" said Mark; "but it's of no use."

"Aren't no lead," said the boy quietly; "but it's fine to have such a
place, and be able to say it's ours.  May be some use."

"But I say, how are you going to find your way back?"

"Oh, I dunno," said the boy carelessly.  "I've often been lost in the
other parts, and I always found my way out."

"Yes, but how?"

"Oh, I dunno, quite, Master Mark," said the boy earnestly, "but it's
somehow like this.  I turn about a bit till I feel which is the right
way, and then I go straight on, and it always is."

"Mean that, Dummy?"

"Oh yes, Master Mark; that's right enough.  But come along."

There was a certain excitement in penetrating the dark region, with its
hills and descents, passages and chambers, deep cracks and chasms, down
in which water was running, and strange ways, formed either by the
settling or opening of the rock, or literally cut away by the rushing
water; and every step was made interesting by the weird shapes around,
formed by the dripping of water from the roof.

Earth there was none, the stalactites and stalagmitic formations were of
the cleanest stone, pale drab, cream, or ruddy from the solution of
iron; and at last, when they must have been walking, climbing, forcing
their way through narrow cracks, or crawling like lizards, for hours,
the boy stooped by a little pool of crystal water in the floor, and
said:

"Don't you think a bit o' bread and cheese would be nice, Master Mark?"

"Yes; that's what's the matter with me," cried the lad.  "I was
beginning to feel poorly.  It's because I did not have a proper
breakfast."

The next minute they had stuck their twice renewed candles in a crack in
the rock wall, and were seated upon a dry stalagmite looking like the
top of a gigantic mushroom, eating ravenously, and moistening their dry
food with copious draughts from the crystal pool.  There was water, too,
below them, a low rushing gurgle announcing that they were still
following the course of the subterranean stream running through a wide
crevice in the floor.

"How much farther does it go, Dummy?"

The boy shook his head.

"May be for miles; but we'll see now, won't we?"

"Let's finish our eating first, and then see how we feel," said Mark.
"If we don't now, we will some other time.  I say, if that water was not
running, how quiet it would be!"

"Yes," said Dummy, with his mouth full.  "I don't think anybody was ever
here before."

"I suppose not," said Mark, looking round.

"Here, have some more of my cheese," said the boy.  "You haven't got
none."

Mark nodded, and took the piece cut by the boy's pocket-knife, for it
improved the dry bread.

"It's some of yours," said Dummy, with a grin.  "They give it me in the
kitchen."

Mark was looking round, and listening to the water.

"I say, Dummy, suppose there was to be a storm outside, and this place
filled up, we should be drowned."

"Never been no water along here, only drips," said the boy, examining
the floor.  "No, there's never been any floods here."

"How do you know?"

"Been some mud or sand left," said the boy, scraping in a narrow chink
in the floor.  "All hard stone."

"I suppose you're right; but we must be very deep down."

"No.  I have been thinking, just as you have to when we're looking for
fresh lead, we've been down a deal, and we've been up a deal, 'bout as
much one as t'other.  I should say we're just a little lower down than
when we started from that big water-hole, but not much."

"Made my back ache a bit, Dummy," said Mark, with a groan, as he leaned
himself against a column which was pleasantly smoothed and curved.

"Yes, we've come a good way," replied Dummy, "and you didn't have no
sleep last night."

The boy munched his last crust, and then lay flat down on his breast,
with his mouth over the pool, lowered his lips, and took a long deep
drink, after the fashion of a horse.  After this, he rolled himself
clear away, and lay upon his back, staring at the two candles stuck in
the crack a few feet above his head.

"Does rest your back and lynes, Master Mark, to lie like this for a bit.
You just try it."

There was no reply.

"D'you hear, Master Mark?  You try it."

Still no response, and he turned his head, to see that his companion's
chin was resting upon his chest.

"Sleep!" said Dummy, with a little laugh.  "Can't stand being up all
night like I can.  Being on night-shifts, sometimes, I s'pose.  Well,
let him sleep for a few minutes, and then I'll wake him."

Then all was blank.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

JUST IN TIME.

All at once Dummy Rugg uttered a peculiar snort, and started up in a
sitting position, with the thought still fresh in his brain that he must
rouse up Mark from his nap.

But all was dark, and there was the gurgling rush of the water below.
"Why, I've been asleep," muttered the lad excitedly.  "Think o' me doing
that!"

He rose quickly, and felt for the crack in which he had stuck the
candles, narrowly escaping a plunge into the little pool from which he
had drunk.

He found the spot where the candles had been, both of them; he could
feel it by the size, and knew it by the shape, for it grew smaller at
each extremity, so that he had been able to wedge the ends of the
candles tight.

Yes: there was no doubt about it.  Both candles, as if to be in fashion
with the stony drippings of the cavern, had run down a little, to form
tiny stalagmites of grease.

"Burnt right out," muttered Dummy, still more excitedly.  "Why, I may
ha' been asleep for hours."

Thrusting his hand into his breast, there was a faint rattle as he drew
out tinder-box and match, and then felt for a candle in the box he had
carried slung by a strap from the shoulder, and laid it ready.

The next minute he was nicking a piece of flint against the steel,
striking sparks down into the box, and at the second sharp click Mark
started awake.

"Yes!  What is it?" he cried--"Where am I?"

"On'y here, Master Mark," replied the boy.  "Candle's gone out."

"Why, Dummy!  Have we been to sleep?"

"I s'pose so, Master Mark.  Po-o-o-o-f-f-uf!  There we are!"

He had obtained a light, the match burning up brightly, and then the
candle, after the fluffy wick had been burnt and blown.

"How tiresome!  I don't know, though.  I feel rested."

"Being up all last night, I s'pose," said Dummy, as he stuck the candle
in the crack.

"Yes, of course; that's it.  Think we've been asleep long?"

"I dunno.  Fear'd so."

"Let's go back, then, at once," said Mark, springing to his feet.  "Why,
we may have been asleep for hours.  Light another candle, and let's get
back."

"Right, Master Mark.  Well, it don't much matter, for we hadn't nothing
to do."

The second candle was lit, and stuck in the rough wooden carrying-stick,
the other was taken from the crack in the stone and treated the same.

"Won't go no furrer, then, Master Mark?" said the boy.

"No, not to-day," said Mark decisively, as he looked round the chamber,
and then stooped to take a draught of the clear water, an example Dummy
followed.

"Ready, Master Mark?"

"Yes, lead on.  But which way?"

"Don't you know, sir?" said Dummy grinning.

"Haven't the least idea.  Have you?"

"Yes, sir.  This way.  I know."

"But are you sure you are right?"

"Ay, this is right."

"Then you have been there before?"

"Nay, never; but I can feel that's right," and he pointed in the
opposite direction to that which Mark felt they ought to take.

"Forward, then, and let's get out as quick as we can."

"Yes, but it'll take some time;" and the boy led on.

"Why, Dummy," cried Mark, suddenly, "we must have slept for hours and
hours."

"How do you know, sir?"

"Why, I can feel."

"In your head, like, sir?" said Dummy eagerly.

"Head?  No: somewhere else," cried Mark, laughing.  "I am half-starved."

A good three hours must have elapsed before, after a weary climb and
tramp, and when the last candle had been lit, the two lads emerged from
behind the stony veil into the grotto-like place that had deceived Mark
Eden.

"Don't matter about candles now, Master Mark," said Dummy; "I could find
my way out ready enough by touching the wall with one hand."

"Well, make haste and let's get out; I don't want to be in fresh trouble
through stopping so long.  I believe it's supper-time."

"Yes, Master Mark," replied the boy, "and so do I."

They had still a long way to go, but once past the veil of stalactite,
they began to enter the workings with the passages and chambers
possessing fairly level floors, made for the convenience of transporting
the ore to the mouth of the mine.  The walking then became comparatively
easy, but Mark's weariness was on the increase, and there were moments
when the faint glow of light which spread around Dummy, as he walked in
front, grew misty and strange, playing fantastic tricks to the
observer's eye: now it seemed close to him; now it and the black
silhouette it formed of the bearer's body appeared to be far-off, and to
die away in the distance, but only to return again with a sudden jerk,
as Mark started and tried to step out more firmly.

At these moments, his own candle having burned out, Mark watched the
shadow of his companion dancing about, now on the floor, now on the
ceiling or on either side, looking grotesque and goblin-like for a few
moments, and then dying out again and causing the lad to start, as he
felt in a dreamy way that he was being left behind, though on recovering
his fleeting senses it was only to find that Dummy was almost within
touch.

This had been going on for some time, when Mark spoke:

"I say, don't go right away and leave me, Dummy."

"Who's a-going to?" said the boy, looking round in surprise.

"I know you wouldn't on purpose, but keep looking round.  I can't keep
awake.  My legs do, but all the rest goes to sleep, and I begin getting
in a muddle."

"Oh, we shall soon be out now," said the boy laughing.

"Soon be out!  I never knew the place was so big before.  Keep looking
back to see that I don't drop down fast asleep."

"I'd make you go first," said Dummy, "but you don't know the way."

"No: keep on as you are, and make haste."

"Can't: must go steady, because of the candle."

"Oh dear!" sighed Mark.  "I am so sleepy, and it's beginning to get down
below my belt, to where my leg was hurt."

"No, no, don't you think that," cried Dummy.  "Let's keep on talking."

"Yes," said Mark, jumping at the proposal.  "Let's keep talking--Who are
you laughing at?"

"You, Master Mark.  You are sleepy.  'Tarn't far, now.  Fresh air'll
soon rouse you."

There was no reply, and as the boy glanced back he could see that his
companion was beginning to reel about like a drunken man, and that his
eyes had a peculiar dull, fixed look.

The next minute the lids drooped, and he walked on as if that which he
had said was quite true--that all was fast asleep but the legs, which
went on automatically, and supported their load.

"With a fal, lal-lal, lal-lalla, lalla, la!" yelled Dummy, not
unmusically; and it had its effect, for Mark sprang at him, and caught
him by the shoulder.

"What was that?" he cried excitedly.

"On'y me singing, Master Mark.  Soon be out now."

"That's what you keep on saying," cried the lad, pettishly.  "I don't
believe we're going right.  You've taken a wrong turning by mistake.
Here, I can't go any farther, Dummy.  I must lie down and go to sleep
again.  It's horrible to keep on like this.  I know I shall fall."

"You do, and I'll stick a pin in you," said the boy roughly.

"What!"

"I'm not going to have you fall asleep again.  Come, rouse up, Master
Mark; I'm ashamed of you.  For two pins I'd hit you over the head."

"What!" cried Mark, in an access of passion; "why, you ugly big-headed
mole, how dare you speak to me like that?"

"'Cause I like," cried Dummy sharply.  "Talking of going to deep, like a
great gal.  Yah!  Gen'lemen aren't no use.  Never do have no legs."

"You insolent dog!" roared Mark, leaping at him, and striking the boy
twice heavily on the back, with the result that the one candle was
jerked out of the stick he carried, to fly forward on to the floor,
flicker for a moment or two, and then, before it could be seized, go
out, and with it Mark's bit of passion.

"Oh!" he cried, as he stood fast in the darkness.

"There, you've done it now," cried Dummy, in mock tones of horror.

"Yes, be quick; get out the flint and steel."

"What for?"

"To get a light."

"For you to begin knocking me about again."

"No, no, Dummy; I won't touch you again.  It was your fault: you made me
so cross."

"All right, Master Mark," said the boy, with a good-humoured laugh.  "I
only did it o' purpose to wake you up, and it has.  I don't mind what
you did.  Don't feel sleepy now, do you?"

"No, no, I'm quite awake.  The drowsy feeling has gone off.  Come, light
the candle."

"Shan't now," replied Dummy.  "We're only a little way off now, and I
can manage."

"But are you sure?"

"Oh yes, I'm sure enough, Master Mark.  Wait a minute."

"Yes.  What are you going to do?"

"Only unloose a few rings of this line we brought."

"What for?  If you play me any tricks now we're in the dark, I'll--"

"Who's going to play any tricks?" grumbled the boy.  "Men don't play
tricks.  Here, kitch holt: now you can follow me, and feel me, if you
keep the rope tight, and won't go hitting yourself again the wall."

Mark grasped the end of the rope handed to him, and they started forward
in the intense blackness, the novelty and sense of shrinking soon
passing off, and the lad feeling more and more confidence in his leader.

"Don't feel a bit sleepy now, do you?" asked Dummy.

"Not in the least.  I say, are you sure that you can go on without
taking a wrong turning?"

"Oh yes, I'm right enough, Master Mark."

"How far is it now?"

"On'y 'bout fifty fathom or so.  We're just getting to the rise."

"Then we--no, you're wrong.  We can't be.  Why, if we were so near the
mouth we should see daylight."

"What! in the middle o' the night?  Not you."

"What!  You don't think it's so late as that?"

"Yes, I do.  It's past twelve o'clock, if it's a minute."

"Then we must have slept a very long time below there."

"Hours upon hours," said Dummy, chuckling.

"Hark!  What's that?" said Mark excitedly.

"Shouting," said the boy, after listening.  "My! they are making a row
about it.  They're coming to fetch us, because we've been so long."

The two lads were still making for the mouth of the mine, and were now
ascending the rough steps, to pause by the stone shed inside the
entrance, where tools, gunpowder for blasting, and several kinds of
tackle were kept, in among the candles and torches.

"Here, Dummy," cried Mark excitedly, as the noise outside and above them
increased, "what does this mean?  They're fighting!"

"Fighting?" cried the boy excitedly.

"Yes, what can it mean?"

"Mean, Master Mark?  I can tell you.  It's the Darleys come at last to
take our place.  Oh, why didn't I kill young Ralph that night when I
followed him home through the wood?"

"You did what?"

"Followed him.  I wasn't sure he'd been trying to kill you, or I would."

"Come along, and don't talk," whispered Mark excitedly.  "Ah!  I have no
sword."

"Got a pick in your belt, and so have I."

"You'll stand by me, Dummy?"

"Won't I, Master Mark!  I want to get a hit at some of 'em.  You won't
stop me, will you, to-night?"

"If they've come and attacked us, no.  Hush, quiet!  Let's steal out
first, and see."

The night was very dark as they left the mouth of the mine, but after
their late experience it seemed to both to be comparatively light, and
with Mark now armed with the miner's pick, which he felt would be a good
substitute for a battle-axe, they hurried up the steps, with the noise
above increasing, but seeming to be over on the other side of the little
castle.  A minute or two later they had reached the platform which led
to their right over the narrow natural bridge, to the left, through the
gateway into the first courtyard.  This was empty, and they ran lightly
across it, to find that the encounter was going on beyond the second
gateway, which led into the little inner courtyard, surrounded by the
dwelling-house portion of the castle.  Both gateways were furnished with
means of defence, the outer having an iron grille of heavy crossed bars,
while the second had folding doors of massive oak, with a wicket for
ordinary use in the lower part of one of the folds.  But in spite of the
enmity between the two families, little heed had of late been given to
the defences.  Sir Edward had considered that the outer gate at the end
of the natural bridge was sufficient, as there was so little likelihood
of an attack without warning; and, as far as Mark could make out, it
seemed that under cover of the darkness the enemy had crossed the bridge
and forced the gate under the little towers, when the rest would be easy
for them.  They had only had to pass through the first courtyard, and
were now in the lesser or inner court, evidently trying to batter down
the entrance door into the hall.

They must have begun their work before Sir Edward and his people were
alarmed; but how long before it was impossible to tell.  What met the
eyes of the two lads now was an armed group trying to batter in the
great door by means of a beam they had brought up into the yard, while
others, armed with pikes, guarded their companions, upon whom missiles
of all kinds were being dashed down from above, and thrusts were being
made with other pikes from the windows which flanked or overhung the
door.

"The Darleys," whispered Dummy, as they peered together round the inner
corner of the gateway dividing the two courts.

"In with it, boys!" roared a hoarse voice; and they dimly made out a
heavy figure standing in the shelter of the wall.

"Captain Purlrose and his gang," whispered back Mark huskily.  "I wonder
how many men my father has in there."

"They were going over to Dexham for a holiday, all but them as was
hurt," whispered Dummy.  "Come on and help, or the robbers'll get in."

A pang shot through Mark, and he grasped the handle of his pick firmly,
ready for a dash, but the feeling that it would be utter madness kept
him back.  For he knew that even if he could strike down two of the
attacking party, they must succumb to the others, and they would have
done no good.

It was all plain enough.  Purlrose must have gained the information that
the mine people were away, and that Sir Edward would be almost without
defenders, and, out of revenge for the previous night's attack, have
seized the opportunity for a reprisal.

"Why, Dummy," he whispered, with his lips close to the other's ear, "if
they take the castle, they'll keep it, and turn us out."

"Yes, and grab the mine," said the boy hoarsely.  "Well, we mustn't let
'em."

_Bang_, _bang_, came the reports of a couple of arquebuses from one of
the windows, but no harm was done, and the men answered with a derisive
cheer and continued their battering of the door, which still resisted
their efforts.

Another shot was fired, but still without effect, and Mark ground his
teeth together as he felt the impotency of his father's efforts now that
the enemy had stolen in beyond the gates that would have been admirable
for defence.

"Well, aren't you going to do something, Master Mark?"

"What can I do, Dummy?" cried the lad, in despair.  "We might shut these
gates, and defend them."

"Yes, so we could; but what's the good?"

Just then there was a quick flash and a sharp roar close to the doorway,
and in the bright light the lads saw the men drop the beam and run back;
but no one was hurt, and in answer to a roar of orders from their
leader, the enemy seized the beam again and began to drive it against
the centre of the great door.

"Running away from that," roared Purlrose; "handful of powder rolled up
in a bag and thrown at you!  Down with it! they've got no more."

"Yes, they have," whispered Dummy, excitedly.  "Here, Master Mark,
quick!"

Mark grasped the idea, without explanation, and ran back with his
companion, leaving the shouting, cursing, and firing behind, to descend
with him to the mouth of the mine, and then downward to the big stone
shed, where Dummy tore open the great oaken closet, and drew out a bag
of the coarse blasting-powder used in the mine.

"Feel in that box, Master Mark; that's it.  You know.  The fuse cord."

Mark had a roll of loose twisted hemp soaked in saltpetre and powder out
of the box directly, and armed with a powder-bag each, they hurried
trembling back, to reach the gateway, peer round the corner, and see
that the attack was going on as fiercely as ever, while the defence was
very weak, and they knew that before long the door must yield.  In fact,
amidst a burst of cheers, a hole had been already driven through, to be
made use of by the defenders for sending thrusts out with their pikes.

"Up with you," whispered Mark, and the two lads hurried up a little
winding staircase on to the top of the inner gate-tower, from whence
they could go along one side of the little yard, hidden by the
crenellated battlement, till they were about five-and-twenty feet from
where the men were carrying on their attack.

"Light it, and chuck it among 'em," whispered Dummy, but he proceeded
with system.  "Put t'other inside the doorway," he whispered.  "Don't
want that to go off too."

Mark obeyed, and returned unseen by those below, or the party defending
the hall-door, to find that his companion, used to seeing such things
done, had cut a little hole in the side of the powder-bag, inserted a
piece of the fuse, and thrust the rest in his pocket.

"Here, you hold the end of the string up," whispered Dummy; and there
was a rattling noise, as he took out the flint and steel he was
carrying.

A cold chill ran through Mark.

"Mind," he whispered; "you'll blow us to pieces."

"Nay, I won't," said the lad, between his teeth.  "You hold the thing in
your hands; open it out a bit.  I won't send no sparks nigh the powder.
Aren't afeared, are you?"

"No," said Mark, setting his teeth; and stooping down, he screened the
bag by passing the fuse between his knees, holding the frayed-out end
ready while Dummy made a low clicking noise, and cleverly sent a shower
of sparks down upon the prepared hemp.

It caught directly, and began to sparkle and sputter, Mark holding it
firmly, but feeling as if he were the victim of some horrible nightmare
dream.

"That's the way," said Dummy, coolly replacing the flint and steel.  "It
won't go off yet.  I want it to burn till it's nearly ready, and then
heave it down right amongst 'em.  Make some on 'em squint."

"Throw it--throw it," panted Mark hoarsely.

"Nay, not yet.  They'd see it burning, and tread it out.  Here, you let
me have it.  I'll hold it to the last minute, and when I throw, you duck
yourself down, or you might get burnt."

Dummy took hold of the burning cord with his left hand, the bag with his
right, pressing his companion out of the road, and then standing
twitching the sparkling fuse, which was only a few inches away from the
powder in the bag.

"I've often seen it done," he whispered.

A shout came up from the little court, for the followers of Captain
Purlrose had again driven their battering ram through the great door,
and a shout of defiance came back from the hall from a few voices, among
which Mark recognised his father's; but he could not turn from that
sparkling piece of line to glance over the stony battlement to see what
was being done.  His eyes were fascinated, and nothing could have
withdrawn them then.

He had proved again and again that he was no coward, but a great terror
chained him now, and his voice trembled as he panted out:

"Quick--quick; throw--throw!"

"Nay, not yet.  I'm watching of it.  Father always waits till there's
on'y about an inch, to make sure it'll go off."

There was not much more as he spoke, and just then, in obedience to an
order from their captain, the men drew back from the doorway, balancing
the beam swung between them, as, four on each side now, it hung from
their hands, and backing till they were past the spot where the pair
were crouching.

"Now, all together, my brave boys," cried Purlrose; "a good run, and
down goes the door.  Off!"

The order answered for Dummy as well as the men, and feeling now that he
had waited too long, the boy swung the bag over the battlement.  The
passage through the air increased the sparkling of the fuse, and before
it touched the pavement, a few feet in front of the men starting for
their run, there was a wondrous flash of light, a fierce wind drove the
two lads backward, and then came a deafening roar, mingled with the
breaking of glass, a yell of horror, and as the roof still quivered
beneath the lads' feet they heard the rush of men through the gateway,
across the next court, and through the outer opening on to the bridge,
and then down the first slope.

"Come on!" cried Dummy, running to the low doorway of the gate-tower,
where he picked up the other powder-bag, and, hardly knowing what he
did, Mark followed him down the winding stair into the gateway.

"Come on!" cried Dummy again, and Mark still followed, across the outer
court and the first gateway, grasping the pick from his belt, feeling
that they were about to charge the rear of the flying enemy.

"Come on," shouted Dummy, for the third time, and they crossed the
narrow space, which brought them to the little tower and gateway by the
natural bridge, where, as Mark closed up, he could hear the babble and
growl of voices from the bottom of the first slope.

"Shied it too soon," growled the boy.  "I don't believe it's killed
one."

"They're coming back, Dummy," cried Mark, "and the gate's broken away
from the hinges."

"Then they shall have it this time," cried the lad, and cutting a hole
with his knife in one corner of the powder-bag, he held it down at one
side behind the massive wall of the little tower, and striding his legs,
walked slowly forward till he reached the middle of the bridge, where he
plumped the powder-bag down, after leaving a little train of the black
grains behind him where he walked.

Then carefully avoiding it, he stepped quickly back to where Mark was
standing, and took out and handed him the flint and steel.

"You do it this time," he said.  "We shall be in shelter here.  I'll
watch and say when."

Mark took the rough implements, and knelt down by the commencement of
the train.

"Hold it close down, quite steady, and give one good nick, and it will
set the powder off."

"Come on, you cowardly dogs," cried a now familiar voice.  "There's
everything that's good in there, and the place will be ours, I tell you.
What, going to be scared by a puff of smoke?  The place is our own now.
All here?"

"Ay," came in a growl.

"Form in good order, three abreast, and charge right across and into the
yard.  Halt!  Steady!  To think of running for a flash in the pan!"

"You ran too," growled a voice.

"You won't be happy till you're strung up, Hez Bingham," cried the
captain.  "Now then: swords.  Steady!  Forward!"

"Now!" whispered Dummy; and as the men tramped on to the bridge for
their renewed attack, Mark struck the steel with his flint, and a tiny
spark or two fell.

"Quick--another!" whispered Dummy, and the men halted in the middle of
the bridge.

"Forward!" shouted the captain from the rear; "what are you halting
for?"

"What's this here?" growled one of the men in the first line, for he had
caught sight of the powder-bag lying in the middle of the pathway, his
question taking off his comrades' attention from the two sharp clicks
which came from behind the lesser gateway.

But they saw a little line of light and smoke running over the stone
paving of the bridge, and with a yell of horror, they turned and fled
hurriedly back and down the slope.

"Don't look!" yelled Dummy, forcing Mark aside, when the flash brought
the castle and summit of the Black Tor into full view; then there was an
awful muffled roar, which went echoing away, and as it died out, the two
lads dashed across the bridge to the head of the zigzag descent, to make
out by hearing that the enemy were in full retreat.

"I think that settled 'em," said Dummy quietly.  "You did it fine,
Master Mark."

"Hoi!  Who's there?" cried a voice behind them.

"Dummy Rugg, father."

"And you, my boy?  Thank Heaven!  I was afraid something was wrong."

"Then it was you two with my powder," cried another voice out of the
darkness.

"Yes, Dan Rugg, and a splendid use they made of it," cried Sir Edward.
"Well done, my lads.  But come into shelter; they surprised us, with
everything left open.  We must lock the stable door now.  Think they'll
come again, Rugg?"

"Nay, Sir Edward; not to-night.  Those explosions will bring our lads up
to see what's the matter."

"Well, secure the gates as we go in."

Dan Rugg was right.  Within half-an-hour a dozen men had come up and
been admitted, ready to meet the enemy should he return, but the silence
up at the Black Tor was not disturbed again that night.

"Out of revenge for you boys' attack," said Sir Edward, when he had
heard his son's account of their proceedings in the mine, and Dummy's
clever thought about the powder.  "It might have meant the loss of this
place.  But there must be an end to it now.  You lads were so handy with
the powder-bags that you shall try your hands upon that wasps' nest, for
I can't rest now till I've had it well burnt out.  Pity more powder was
not used this time.  I don't believe they were more than singed, and
half my windows were smashed."

"But if we had used more powder, father," said Mark, smiling, "we might
have knocked down the place."



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

AN ENEMY IN DISTRESS.

The rattling of a handful of tiny pebbles took Mark Eden to his window
that morning--for it was beginning to grow grey in the east when he went
to his bed, Sir Edward insisting upon his going, and announcing that he
was going to keep watch with three men.

Mark pleaded for permission to join in the vigil, but Sir Edward firmly
ordered him to go and take proper rest; so he went, feeling that after
such an exciting time sleep would be impossible, and going off directly
into a deep dreamless slumber, from which he was awakened by that shower
of pebbles.

He threw open the casement, fully expecting to find that he had been
summoned to help defend the place from a fresh attack; but only saw
Dummy Rugg below in the yard, waving his arms to him.

"Dress yourself and come down, Master Mark," cried Dummy, in a hoarse
whisper, uttered between his hands.  "What is it--the enemy?"

"Yes," said Dummy, nodding his head a great deal.  "He wants to see
you."

"Me or my father?"

"You," whispered Dummy mysteriously.  "Look sharp."

Mark did look as sharp as he could, hurriedly washing and dressing,
while still feeling stupid and thick with sleep.

As he went down he saw one of the servants, and asked for Sir Edward,
but learned that his father had not long gone to his chamber.

He went out of the battered hall-door, looked round at the shivered
casements and the walls blackened and whitened by the powder blast, and
then hurried through the gateway into the outer court.

But Dummy was not there now, so he passed through and saw the boy
waiting at the entrance of the gateway which had protected the bridge so
poorly on the previous night.

"Where is he?" cried Mark.

"Bit o' the way down the path," was the reply.

"Is it Captain Purlrose?" asked Mark.

"Yah!  No, not him.  T'other enemy."

"What enemy?  Whom do you mean?"

"Him you hate so.  Young Ralph Darley."

"Here?" cried Mark in astonishment.

"Yes; I see him coming up, and was going to heave a big stone down on
him, but he threw up his hands, and called out as he wanted you."

"Why, what can he want?" cried Mark, flushing with fresh excitement.

"I dunno, but it's some mischief, or a Darley wouldn't have come.  You
be on the look out: he's got his sword.  I'll come with you and let him
have my pick if he means anything again' you.  He's heard of the
fighting, and thinks we're beat; so just you look out."

"You stop here," said Mark sharply, for he felt that this must be an
advance toward friendship on the part of the Darleys--that on hearing of
the attack Sir Morton had sent his son as an ambassador, to offer to
join Sir Edward Eden in an expedition to crush their mutual foe.

"Stop here, Master Mark, and let you go into danger," cried Dummy.  "I
won't!"

"Stop here, sir!  How dare you!" cried Mark.  "Do you think that I
cannot defend myself against a boy like that?"

"He's as big a boy as you are, Master Mark, and I won't let you go
alone."

"Dummy, you're an insolent dog," cried Mark haughtily.  "Keep your
place, sir, or I'll never go down the mine with you again."

"Oh, very well," said the boy sulkily, "but if he cuts your head off,
don't come and howl about it to me after it's done."

"I promise you I won't," cried Mark.

"And I shall climb up yonder and watch you, Master Mark; and if he kills
you I'll follow him till I get him, and I'll take him and heave him down
that big hole in the mine, where the water falls."

Mark hardly heard this, for he was hurrying over the bridge, followed by
Dummy, who, as his young master went down the zigzag path, began to
climb up to where he could keep watch, a sentry being higher still,
where he could command the approaches to the Tor Castle.

At the bottom of the third slope, Mark came upon Ralph, who was
approaching to meet him, and at a glance he saw that something terrible
had happened, for the lad's face was haggard and wild.  There were
smears of blood about his temples, while his face looked as if it had
been washed, and some injury had bled again.  In addition, a closer
inspection showed that his hair had been singed off on one side, while
the other was matted by dry blood.

"Why, hullo!  Have you been in the wars too?"

"Help!" cried the lad, holding out his hands to him imploringly.

"Help?  You come to me!" said Mark wonderingly.

"Yes, to you, mine enemy," cried Ralph, with a wild hysterical cry.  "I
am humbled now--there is no one else to go to.  Oh, for pity's sake,
help!"

He covered his face with his hands in his shame and agony, feeling that
his manhood had gone out of him, and Mark felt that something terrible
must have occurred, for a burst of hysterical sobbing escaped from the
wounded lad, and he threw himself face downward upon the path.

For a moment shame and contempt reigned in Mark Eden's breast, but they
were chased away by a manly feeling of pity for the enemy who seemed to
be humbling himself so before him.

Then all selfishness passed away in turn, and the word enemy dropped out
of his being as the true English boy shone out of his eyes in compassion
for a lad who had evidently passed through some terrible experience.

"I say!  Darley," he said gently, "don't go on like that.  I know,
though I don't like you, that you are a brave lad, and it hurts me to
see you so.  There's a sentry up yonder, and our boy, Dummy.  Don't let
them see you cry.  It's like a woman."

Ralph sprang to his feet, with his face distorted, and his eyes flashing
wildly.

"Yes," he cried fiercely, "like a weak, pitiful girl; but I couldn't
keep it back.  If it had not come I should have gone mad, for my head
felt as if it was on fire.  That's past now, and I can talk.  You see
how I am, I have come to you and your father--to you Edens, our
enemies--to ask you by all that is holy, by all that's manly, to help
me."

He stopped, panting, and trying to speak, but the words would not come;
he was choking.  The blood seemed to rush to his temples so that the
veins stood out, and he reeled and would have fallen had not Mark
caught, supported him, and lowered him down upon the rocky path.

Then looking up, he shouted to Dummy.

"Fetch two men here--quick!" he cried.

Dummy disappeared, and Mark knelt down and unfastened the neck of the
lad's doublet, and saw that his head had received a bad cut, for the cap
had fallen off, and his face was ghastly.

"Poor lad!" said Mark softly.  "I know it's wrong, but I can't help
liking him.  Why, I know," he cried excitedly.  "That's it.  I never saw
such an enemy!  He must have known that we were being attacked, and been
coming to help us, and those fiends have served him like this.  That's
it!  He's just the fellow who would do it, for I know he likes me.  I've
seen it over and over again."

He sprang up, feeling ashamed of what he had said, and afraid of being
seen by his people, for he heard steps coming; and directly after, Dummy
came running down, followed by a couple of stout miners, each fully
armed.

"Here, Dummy," cried Mark, "run all the way to Master Rayburn, and tell
him to come here directly."

"Go to fetch Master Rayburn for him?" said the boy, staring.

"Yes, can't you see he is wounded and burnt?  Run, or I'll go myself!"

Dummy, awed by this--to him--awful threat, dashed down the zigzag at a
dangerous pace, while, at their young master's orders, the two miners
gently lifted and bore the insensible lad up to the castle, into the
dwelling-house, and then to Mark's chamber, where he was laid upon the
bed.

As soon as he had dismissed the bearers, Mark began to bathe the lad's
temples, and in a few minutes he opened his eyes and stared wildly
round.

"Where am I?" he said.

"Here: safe," said Mark.

Recollection came back to the poor fellow's swimming brain, and he threw
his legs off the couch and tried to rise, but sank back with a groan.

"There: you can't," said Mark soothingly, and he took his hand.  "Tell
me--what's happened?  You didn't see, because you'd fainted when I had
you brought in, but we're in trouble too.  But I suppose you know.  Were
you going to help?"

"To help?" said Ralph faintly.  "No; to ask for help.  They took us by
surprise.  Our men wounded.  Just at day-break.  We were all asleep.
They climbed in."

"Who did?  Purlrose?"

"Yes; and his men.  Father called me to dress, and we called the men
together, but they got between us and the arms.  The cowards! they cut
us down.  The poor lads who were wounded too.  All so sudden.  In a few
minutes it was all over.  Father prisoner--half our men dead; rest
locked in one of the lower rooms: and I crawled away--to lie down and
die, I thought."

"Why, it must have been after they had failed here," muttered Mark.

"They did not see me; I was behind an over-turned table, and a curtain
and chair over me.  I could hear all they said.  They sat and drank
after they had dragged out four of our poor fellows, dead."

"Then they sat and talked; I heard them.  That captain said Cliff Castle
would do as well as Black Tor, and they would stay there."

"Ah!" panted Mark excitedly.

"And a great deal more.  It meant that they'd taken the place, and I
felt then that I must die.  I don't know how long they were there.  It
was hot and stifling, and there was smoke, and a man rushed in, and said
the prisoners had escaped, and set fire to the place."

Ralph shuddered and was silent, till Mark began bathing his face again,
when he seemed to revive a little, and wandered on:

"Fire burned so fast--crawled out--through the window--Minnie's
fish-pool--castle burning so fast--father--Minnie--help!--oh help!"



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

DRAWING TOGETHER.

Mark bathed the sufferer's face again, but there was no return to
consciousness, and growing more and more alarmed, he hurried to his
father's chamber and woke him, Sir Edward as he leaped up, still
dressed, snatching eagerly at his sword.  "You, Mark?" he cried.  "The
enemy?"

"Yes--no, father.  Come quickly.  Young Darley's here, dying."

"Young Darley here!"

"Yes, in my room," cried Mark wildly.  "I've sent for Master Rayburn,
but come and do something; we mustn't let the poor fellow die."

And in a wild incoherent way, he told Sir Edward all he knew.

"Then in their disappointment they went on down there," cried Sir
Edward, as excited now as his son.  "The fiends! the monsters!" he
continued, as he entered his son's room.  "Poor boy!  Oh, Mark, lad, but
for God's mercy, this might have been you.  Oh! who can think about the
old family enmity now?  How long is it since you sent for old Rayburn?"

"Ever so long, father.  Oh, I say, don't--don't say you think he'll die,
father!"

"Heaven forbid, my boy," said Sir Edward softly, and he laid his hand
gently on the wounded lad's brow--and kept it there as Master Rayburn
entered the room.

"You've heard, then!" he cried, throwing down his hat and stick, and
beginning to examine his patient.

"Yes, Mark tells me.  Is it all true?"

"True, yes," growled Master Rayburn.  "I find they attacked you, were
beaten, and then went across and round by the down to Cliff Castle.
When I got there it was in ashes, burnt out, and the wretches had gone
back with what plunder they could save, and two prisoners to their den."

"Two prisoners?"

"Yes--put your finger here, Mark, while I clip off his hair.  Here's a
bad cut--Sir Morton badly hurt, and his sweet young child, Minnie."

"Oh!" cried Sir Edward excitedly.  "But is this true--are you sure?"

"I had it from one of his men, Nick Garth.  Badly wounded too.  But he
and three others broke out of their window where they were prisoned, in
a tower chamber, and out of revenge, to keep the enemy from keeping the
place, as they were going to do, they set it on fire."

"Who did?" said Sir Edward sharply.

"Nick Garth and Ram Jennings.  He's wounded too.  A fine chance for you
now, Eden.  You can march in and take possession of your enemy's lands."

"I'll march in and take possession of that cursed den that my boy here
tried to take, and failed," raged out Sir Edward.  "Mark, we can do
nothing here.  Off with you, and muster every man we have.  I can't show
mercy now.  Tell Daniel Rugg to get ready an ample supply of powder and
fuses, and I'll blow up the hornets' nest, and let them stifle where
they lie.  Rayburn, you'll stay with this poor lad; and Heaven help you
to save his life."

"Amen," said Master Rayburn softly.

"His father--his sister--carried off by these demons," muttered Sir
Edward, and seizing his son's arm, he hurried with him to give his
orders himself.

Mark Eden followed his father, feeling half stunned.  The one thought
which seemed to stand out clear above a tangle of others, all blurred
and muddled, in his brain, was that these troubles--the attack on the
Black Tor, and the hundred times more terrible one upon Cliff Castle--
were caused by him.  Certainty Ralph Darley had something to do with it,
but he was badly wounded and out of the question now, so that he, Mark
Eden, must take all the blame.

Then, too, he could not understand his own acts.  It all seemed so
absurd, just such a confused sequence of events as would take place in a
dream, for him to be listening to Ralph's appeal for help, and to begin
pitying him, his natural enemy, feeling toward him as if he were his
dearest friend; and then, with his heart burning with rage against those
who had injured him and his, to follow his father, panting to get ready
an expedition whose object was to drive Captain Purlrose and his
murderous, thieving crew off the face of the earth.

That was not the greatest puzzle which helped to confuse Mark Eden, for
there was his father's conduct, so directly opposed to everything which
had gone before; but at last, after fighting with his confusion for some
time, his head grew clearer, and he drew a long deep breath.

"I know how it is," he said to himself, with a curious smile, mingled of
pleasure and pain; "the old trouble's dead.  This business has killed
it, and I'm jolly glad."

"Mark, boy," said his father just then, and it seemed to the lad that
his father must have been thinking and feeling in a similar way, "I
daresay you think my conduct strange, after all the teachings of the
past, but nature is sometimes stronger than education, and after what
has taken place we must, as English gentlemen, forget all old enmity,
and behave toward the Darleys as--as--as--"

"I'm sure Ralph and his father would have behaved towards us, if we had
been in such a terrible state."

"Yes, my boy--thank you--exactly," cried Sir Edward, with a sigh of
relief.  "I was afraid you would think it half mad and strange of me to
be doing this, when--when you see we could go over and take possession
of the Darley's place, and hold it for our own."

"But we couldn't now, father," cried Mark.  "If it had been a challenge,
and we had gone and attacked them, and conquered, it would have been
grand, but the Edens couldn't go and fight wounded men--hit people when
they are down."

"No, my boy," said Sir Edward firmly; "the Edens could not do that."

A busy day followed, with the men collected in a state of the wildest
excitement, those who had been wounded in the attack upon the cavern and
the bitter encounter between the allies for the most part declaring
their readiness to bear arms again.

"But you're not fit, Dan," said Mark, as he stood talking to the head
miner.

"Not fit, Master Mark?" cried the sturdy old fellow, showing his teeth;
"I'm going to show that gang of murderous wolves that I am very fit
indeed.  My arm won't go very well, and I turn a bit sick and swimming
whenever I turn my head."

"Then you mustn't go," cried Mark.

"Mustn't, Master Mark," said the man grimly, "but I must.  The lads'll
fight as well again with me there.  And look here: I won't use my right
hand, and I won't turn my head; so I shall be all right, and I'm not
going to fight."

"Then what is the use of your coming?"

The man half shut one eye.

"Powder!" he whispered--"powder.  You know what that will do, eh?"

"Yes, you can manage that, Dan," said Mark thoughtfully.

"Better than any one else, my lad, and that aren't boasting.  Look here,
Master Mark; I've been having it over with the lads, and we all think
the same.  The Darleys are about as bad a lot as ever stepped, and
they've done us a lot o' wrong, and deserved all we could give 'em, but
they aren't deserved this, and we are going to forgive 'em a bit.  Who's
going to stand still and see a lot o' ragged rapscallions come and
attack our enemies, and try to take that castle?  It aren't to be borne,
Master Mark; now is it?"

"No, Dan, it is not to be borne."

"Right, sir.  I've heered everything now: how they'd took the castle,
and was wineing and beering theirselves, and going to stop there, when
Nick Garth--ah!  I do mort'ly hate that fellow--sets fire to the place,
and burns 'em out.  Makes me feel as if I could half forgive him all old
scores.  My pick!  It was a fine idea."

"A grand idea, Dan."

"And don't you see, Master Mark, as they missed getting Cliff Castle,
they'll just wait their time, and catch us napping, and get this place."

"Never," cried Mark hotly.

"Never, it is, Master Mark.  Me and the lads'll blow the old place up
first."

"Mark, my boy," cried Sir Edward just then; "here, I want you."

The lad hurried to his father's side, and a strong hand was clapped upon
his shoulder, Sir Edward looking him full in the face, but with his eyes
thoughtful and fixed.

"No," he said suddenly, "they could not think that if you go alone."

"Who, father?  Where?" said Mark, staring.

"I've been thinking, boy," said Sir Edward.  "We can make up a good
muster, but we ought to be as strong as we can, and it is only right to
give Sir Morton's poor fellows who are left a chance of striking a blow
for their master and young mistress.  Would you mind riding over to the
enemy's camp, and asking all who can to come and join us in our
expedition this evening?"

"Mind?  No, father: I should like to."

"Then go at once."

"Yes, father."

"And bring back with you all you can.  If it's only four or five sturdy
fellows, it is worth while; and I hope they will be willing to come
under my command--no, this will be better: ask them if they will follow
you."

"I think I can bring them," cried Mark, flushing.

"Then off.  Tell them we have plenty of arms."

Mark hurried away, gave Dummy orders to saddle the cob, and ran in and
up to his own room, whose door he opened softly, to start in surprise on
finding a nurse assisting Master Rayburn, and seated by the head of the
bed, fanning the heated brow of the poor disfigured lad, as he lay
muttering in delirium.

"You here, Mary," said Mark, in a sharp whisper.

"Of course she is, boy," cried the old man testily.  "Woman's place--and
girls grow to women--look finer than a queen on a throne, seated by a
sick-bed."

"Yes," assented Mark.  "How is he?"

"Couldn't be worse," said Master Rayburn.  "There, go and beat the dogs,
and if one of them bites you, we'll make up another bed, and nurse you
too; won't we, Mary?"

"Oh, no, no, Mark dear; don't, pray don't you get hurt," whispered the
girl wildly.

"He won't get hurt much," said Master Rayburn.  "Come to stay?"

"No," said Mark, as he made the old man's eyes twinkle by going on
tip-toe to the bedside, and gently taking Ralph's right hand which he
held for a few moments, and then laid it back.

"Needn't put it down in such a hurry, boy," whispered the old man.
"Didn't hurt you, did it?"

"Poor fellow!  No," sighed Mark.  "But I must go.  Father has ordered me
to go down the river to the Cliff, to try and get all the Darley men
together to come and help in the attack."

"What!" cried Master Rayburn; "Sir Edward has told you to do that?"

"Yes," said Mark, flushing hotly.  "Well, what have you to say to it?"

"Nothing," said the old man softly; "only, boy, that I wish you God
speed."

There was the clatter of hoofs heard through the open window, and Mark
hurriedly kissed his sister.

"I'll take care," he said, smiling.

"But the Darley men may attack you, Mark," she whispered excitedly.

"I'm not afraid," he said, laughing.  "Don't let Ralph Darley die,
Master Rayburn; he isn't such a bad fellow after all."

"Bah!  Bad, indeed," said the old man, pressing Mark's arm, and looking
at him proudly, "Deal better fellow than you."

The next minute Mark leaped into the saddle, and the restive cob began
to rear.

"Take me with you, Master Mark," said Dummy, as he held the rein.

"Can't!  Must go alone, Dum.  You come by my side to-night."

"Got to carry bags of powder."

"Well, I shall be there."

"But s'pose the Darleys fight you, Master Mark?"

"They will not, Dummy," cried Mark.  "Let go."

And pressing the cob's sides, the little animal bounded over the narrow
bridge, and would have galloped in a break-neck fashion down the steep
zigzag but for the strong hand at the rein.

The pony had its own way, though, along the rough track by the river, on
past Master Rayburn's peaceful cottage, and away again, till at a bend
of the stream the rider saw a cloud of smoke hanging over the ravens'
cliff, and soon after caught sight of one corner of the castle, with the
glorious beeches and sycamores low down, and birches high up, scorched
and shrivelled; and now he saw through an alley burned by the flames
driven downward by the wind that the beautiful old pile was reduced to a
shell, in whose interior the smoke was still rising from a heap of
smouldering wood.

As he drew nearer, and crossed the ford which led to the steep path up,
he saw on one of the terrace platforms quite a crowd of women and
children, collected from the outlying cottages and farms, all standing
gazing at the smoking ruins; and on one side there was a little group of
men, some standing, others sitting and lying down upon the stones.

"And if it had not been for Dummy our place might have been like this,"
thought Mark, as he rode up.  The men, as they caught sight of him,
began to rise to their feet, two or three actively, the others as if in
pain, but all wearing a savage scowl.

But Mark did not shrink.  He rode right past the women, and drew rein,
as Nick Garth said fiercely:

"Well, youngster, have you come to enjoy's morning's work?"

"What have I ever done to make you think me such a cowardly brute, Nick
Garth?" said Mark boldly; as the others uttered a menacing growl.
"Well," he continued, "is that all you have to say?  What about your
young master?"

The man's face was convulsed by a spasm, and he turned away, pointing
the while at the smoking ruins.

"What does he mean by that?" said Mark to another of the men.

"They killed him," said the man hoarsely.  "Burned, poor lad!  In
yonder."

"No, no," cried Mark excitedly.  "He escaped, and came up to us--to ask
for help."

"The young master?" cried Nick, turning back to look at the speaker
fiercely; "why, I see him cut down with my own eyes."

"I tell you, he crawled out of the fire.  He's badly wounded and burned,
but he's lying in my room, with Master Rayburn by his side."

"Say that again--say that again, youngster!" cried Nick Garth, as he
caught Mark fiercely by the hand, and thrust his blood-smeared and
blackened face close to him.

"There is no need," said Mark.  "He is very bad, but he was able to ask
us for help."

A wild _hurrah_! burst from the men, even the worst wounded waving their
hands, as they crowded round the startled pony, which began to rear, and
tried to unseat his rider.

"Quiet!" cried Mark, patting the spirited little animal's neck, and as
soon as it was quiet, turning to the object of his mission.

"Now," he said, "my father starts this evening to crush out this gang of
miscreants and rescue Sir Morton and your young lady.  We have plenty of
swords and pikes, and I have come to ask as many of you as can strike a
blow to join us."

"Is this a trap, young gen'leman, to make an end of us now we're weak
and down?"

"Look in my eyes, Nick Garth," said Mark, gazing straight at the sullen
lowering face.  "The Edens are gentlemen, not such vile cowards as that.
Now then, who'll come and strike a blow for Sir Morton, your young
lady, and Master Ralph Darley, lying helpless there?"

"All on us, my lad," cried Nick, with a fierce growl--"all on us as can
manage to crawl."

"Ay," rose in a shout.

"It's all right, lads," continued Nick; "the young gen'leman means what
he says.  No one could be such a hound as to come down upon us now.  I
says it's right, sir.  We trust you, and if you'll give us your hand
like a man-like an Englishman should--we'll come."

Mark's hand went out, and his handsome young face shone with the glow
that was at his heart, as he gripped the grimy blackened hand extended
to him.

He held on tightly, and then gazed wonderingly at the man, whose face
turned of a very ashy hue, and he caught at the pony's mane to save
himself from falling.

"What is it?" cried Mark eagerly; "you are faint!"

"Got my hand brent a bit, young master," said the man, recovering
himself with a forced laugh.  "Better now."

He drew back, and limped a little.

"But you are badly hurt.  I'll get Master Rayburn to run down."

"Nay.  We'll come up to him.  Let him stop with the young master."

"You are not fit to come."

"What!  Not to have a stroke at them devils?" cried the man fiercely.
"I'm a-coming, and so's all as can walk.  I'd come if it was half a hour
'fore I was going to die.  I did try to burn 'em where they were
drinking together, on'y I was in too great a hurry.  I ought to ha'
waited till they was asleep."

Mark shuddered slightly, but he said no more, and proceeded to examine
the men, all of whom, to the number of seven, declared themselves fit to
come.

But, including Nick, there were only five really fit to bear arms; the
rest had unwillingly to give up.  Still, there were three quite
uninjured, and these would, Mark felt, be a valuable addition to the
little force at home, for they were burning to try and do something to
help Sir Morton in his terrible strait; and even the women wished to
join.  But this was declared impossible, and soon after, feeling the
strangeness of his position, Mark was riding back with his recruits.

Five minutes later, he cried, "Halt!" and sprang from his pony.

"Here, Garth," he cried, "I can't ride and see you limp along with that
wounded leg."

"Can't help my leg being hurt, young sir," cried the man sourly.  "I
won't go back, so there!"

"I don't want you to; I want you to strike for your master; but you are
lame.  There: up with you.  Master Rayburn will make you better able to
walk when we get to the Tor."

"What, me ride on your pony?" said the man, staring.

"Yes: up, and don't lose time."

The man refused again and again, till Mark cried fiercely:

"You said you'd follow me, and I'm in command.  Up this minute, sir;"
and the man climbed into the saddle.

It was in this fashion that Mark Eden led the Darley men up the zigzag,
and into the inner court of the Black Tor, where his father's followers
welcomed them with a hearty cheer, for, enemies they might be, but those
assembled felt that they were stricken sore.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

"HAS YOUR FATHER BEEN A SOLDIER?"

There had been plenty going on in Mark's absence of an hour or two, and
as soon as he had seen the recruits to their little force settled down
in the hall to rest and refresh, he hastened up to Master Rayburn to
find how his patient was going on.  "Badly, Mark, boy," said the old
man; "very badly.  He has been wounded in the mind as well as body.  The
best remedy for him will be the knowledge that his father and sister are
safe.  Well, what fortune in your mission?"

"That's good in two ways," he said, as soon as he had heard Mark's
account; "strengthens your hands, and sounds as if the people are
getting as wise as their masters."

Mark did not wish to discuss that subject, for it was irksome to him at
a time when he felt that he did not know whether the Darleys and he were
enemies or friends, his thoughts going toward the former as being the
more natural in connection with the past.

Under these circumstances, he hurried away, descended, and found his
father superintending the repair of the gate which defended the castle
by the bridge.  The piping times of peace had caused carelessness, and
this gate had been so neglected that Purlrose and his men had had no
difficulty in levering it off the pivots, and gaining an entrance.

Sir Edward was determined not to be caught sleeping again, for sentinels
had been posted, and various means taken for strengthening the place.
As for the damage to the great doors of the hall, these had already been
covered with stout boarding, and missiles in the shape of heavy stones
and pigs of lead were piled up on the platform of each tower.

Under Dan Rugg's supervision, arquebuses had been cleaned and placed
ready for use, and a couple of small cannon trained where they could
sweep the approach to the bridge, and in turn the gateways leading into
the outer and inner courts.

Sir Edward expressed himself as being highly pleased with his son's
success; and, treating him in this emergency as if he were a man, he
joined him in the little council of war that was held with Dan Rugg.  In
this the best way of proceeding was discussed, and it was determined
that instead of waiting for the darkness, the attacking party should set
off early in the evening.

For old Dan had said: "It's no use to think of trying to surprise them
now, master; they'll be well on the look out for us, and have men ready.
Means a sharp bit of fighting to get up to the hole yonder, but once we
get there, the powder will fight for us."

"You mean to fire some at the entrance?" said Mark.

"Ay, Master Mark; that's it, and then send another bag in before us, and
fire that, and go on doing it till we've either blasted 'em all out of
the place or made 'em so sick and sorry that they'll cry surrender."

The hours glided by, as it seemed to Mark, very slowly, till the time
appointed for starting approached; and, after a final glance at Ralph,
he was coming down, when Master Rayburn followed him.

"I should like to come with you, Mark, my boy," he said gravely, "but my
place is here.  Heaven grant that you may be successful; and if you
are," he said meaningly, "there will be peace in our vale."

Mark pressed his hand, buckled on his sword, and went down into the yard
to join his father, who was giving final instructions to the wounded men
about keeping the gates fast during their absence, not that an attack
was expected, but "to make assurance doubly sure."

While he was giving his last instructions, Dummy came running over the
bridge, and trotted up to Sir Edward.

"Well, boy, could you see anything?"

"Yes," replied Dummy, with a sharp nod of the head.  "You can see two,
if you go far enough, one on each side of the hill, keeping a look out."

"Did they see you?"

"Nay, I was a-creeping among the bushes."

"Then it is of no use to try and get up unobserved, Mark," said Sir
Edward, quietly.  "It must be a bold open attack."

He turned and said a few words to Sir Morton Darley's men, Nick and the
rest, after having had their injuries tended, and a few hours' rest and
refreshment, looking far better prepared for the encounter, and falling
into their places with sullen determination.

Mark, at a word from his father, marched up alongside of Nick Garth, who
gave him a surly nod, and seemed to be about to speak, but checked
himself, and then let his curiosity master him.

"What ha' they got in them baskets?" he said, nodding to a couple strung
from poles, and each hanging from two men's shoulders, "bread and
cheese?"

"No: blasting-powder."

"Eh?  What for?" said the man, staring.

"Blow out the cavern," said Mark quietly.

The man uttered a low long whistle, and then a grim smile covered his
face.

"Hah!" he whispered, "that does a man good, young Eden!  I was coming,
and I meant to fight till I dropped; but after what we tried to do, I
knew they'd be too many for us; but I begin to see my way now."

"Yes, they don't like the powder," said Mark.  "We made them run with it
when they attacked us here."

"What, did they 'tack you here?"

"Yes, and were beaten off, and came down to you."

"Well, it wasn't very neighbourly to send 'em down to us," said the man
sourly.

"You should have beaten them off, and sent them back again," said Mark,
smiling.

Then the order to march came, and the little band of sturdy men went off
at a solemn tramp, Dummy carrying a couple of lanterns and a box slung
from his shoulder, well supplied with torches, candles, and slow match,
for the powder which it did not fall to his lot to bear.

As they passed over the bridge, the wounded men clanged to the gates,
and two of them took their places on the tower above, while, as the
party tramped across and turned to descend the zigzag, a thought came to
Mark, and he turned back to glance at the window of his bed-chamber, as
he wished that Ralph Darley were uninjured and marching by his side to
help in the rescue of his father and sister.

There were two faces at the casement: those of Mary and Master Rayburn;
and as the lad descended the slope they waved their hands to him.  The
next minute the cliff-side hid them from view.

The march in the calm bright evening was uneventful.  Everything was so
beautiful that it seemed hard to realise the horrors which had taken
place during the past night, till Mark looked to right or left, and saw
the bandages of several of the men.  Nick Garth, too, was limping, but
he resolutely kept on declaring that it was nothing to mind.

The Steeple Stone was left to the right, for there was this time no
party of allies to meet; and very soon the great heavy mass of barren
rocky hill loomed up before them, higher and higher, till the party were
out from among the trees which had so far concealed their march, and
proof was soon given that they were observed.

For all at once something was seen to be in motion, and Dummy shouted:

"There: I told you so!"

At the distance they then were, the object seen might have been a sheep
or goat, slowly moving up the higher part of the mountain; but before
long it stood out on the ridge, clear against the golden evening sky,
plainly enough now a man.

Mark judged that after watching them the sentinel waved his hand to some
one below, for the movement was seen, and a few minutes later another,
and again another figure came up to stand clearly marked against the
sky; and after a time all descended, their course being tracked down the
barren hill face, till they disappeared, without doubt, in through the
mouth of the cavern.

"Preparing a warm reception for us, Mark, my lad," said Sir Edward,
advancing to his son's side; "but we shall be able to give them one
equally warm.  Well, my man, how are the wounds?  Would you like to have
ten minutes' halt?"

Nick, to whom this was addressed, showed his teeth in a peculiar smile.

"When we've done our work, master; not before.  Dessay we shall be
'bliged to wait before we get in."

"I hope not," said Sir Edward.  "I mean for us to make a bold rush."

"That's right, master," said the man, whose fellows were listening
eagerly; "but I've been thinking about Sir Morton yonder, and my young
lady."

"Yes?  What about them?" asked Sir Edward.

"You're going to use blasting-powder?"

"Well, what of that?"

"I was thinking about them inside.  We wouldn't like to hurt them."

"Of course not; but as I know the place, there is little fear.  I went
in some distance, some twenty years ago, and the passages run to and fro
and keep opening up into chambers.  Now, one of these, some distance in,
is sure to be turned into a prison for the captives, where they would be
beyond the reach of the powder, and I feel certain that they would be
too far away to be hurt."

"Won't bring the roof down upon 'em, will it?" asked the man.

"I don't think there is any fear; but it is only where we fail to drive
the wretches back that I shall have a charge fired.  I must save my men
from injury as much as I can."

"That's what Sir Morton used to say, young gentleman," said Nick, as Sir
Edward drew back; and for the next half-hour the attacking party, a good
twenty strong, advanced steadily, the steepness of the climb soon
enforcing slower progress.

For some little time now they had been aware of the fact that the enemy
had been making preparations for an attack.  Taught by the last, they
had worked hard, and built-up a massive wall across the entrance to
their stronghold, this defensive work being formed of the rough blocks
lying about the little slope, and for the most part they were dragged
down, and hoisted into their place.

Upon this, half-a-dozen armed men were standing, watching their
approach, and the attacking party made out their swords and pikes, the
latter leaning against a rock, with their bright steel heads sloping
towards the climbers.

When these latter were within about a hundred yards, Sir Edward halted
his party, and ranged them in a curved line, the men at a short distance
from each other, so that as they all made for the mouth of the cave they
would gradually draw together, and be close when they delivered the
attack.

"Pikes only," said Sir Edward.  "Keep your swords for the close
hand-to-hand work."

"Has your father been a soldier, youngster?" whispered Nick Garth
hoarsely.

"No; why?"

"Talks like one.  He couldn't do better.  He'll give the word soon, and
the sooner the better.  I've got my wind now.  'Member the master and
the young missus, lads."

There was a growl from his companions, and as Mark glanced at them he
felt that it would go hard with any one among the enemy who came within
reach of their pikes.

The enemy had, however, now descended from the top of their wall, and
only their heads and breasts were visible, as, ten strong now, they
stood in a row, with their pikes resting upon the top; ready to thrust
at the first who came within reach.

"Now, my lads," cried Sir Edward; "have you all got your wind?"

"Ay!" ran along the crescent line.

"You with the powder, and the two centre men stand fast till you are
wanted."

This order was obeyed as the next was given, and headed by Sir Edward
and his son, the party made steadily for the wall, at first slowly and
gradually increasing the pace, till Sir Edward cried, "Charge!" and they
broke into a trot, the fastest speed to be attained to upon such a
slope.

Then, amidst shouts of hatred and mocking defiance from the marauders,
there was the clash of steel, and the heavy rattling noise made by the
pike-staves, as, thrusting and stabbing, the attacking party strove to
win their way over the wall.  Sir Edward led his men bravely, while, in
a wild fit of excitement, Mark, young as he was, strove to show the
Darley men that he was worthy to be their leader.

A fierce rage filled these men, fresh from the ruined home, and half mad
with desire to revenge themselves upon those who had given them their
wounds; but all along it was the same; they were at a terrible
disadvantage in their approach, their enemies having their undefended
bodies as marks for their weapons, while they had only head and
shoulders to strike at, the rest of their bodies being safe, behind the
strong breastwork.

Then, too, feeling secure in this approach to their stronghold, the
marauders stood firm, waiting their opportunities, and then thrusting
home, with the result that several of their assailants went down, and at
the end of five minutes' vain attack, Sir Edward ordered the men to draw
back a few yards, and with some difficulty he and his son, by rushing
before them, and thrusting up their pikes, induced them to obey.

"This is useless, Mark," he said anxiously.  "They are too strong for
us.  Take the extreme right next time we advance, and I will take the
left.  Then as soon as they are well engaged in front, you, with two men
must try to get in over your end, and drop over amongst them from the
side, and I will do the same.  Do you dare to do that?"

"I feel as if it is horribly risky," replied the boy, "but I'll try."

"Then you will do it," said Sir Edward quietly.  "Choose your men, and I
will do the same."

Five minutes later, amidst the mocking jeers of the men behind the
breastwork, a fresh attack was made, and as Mark reached the front, he
ducked down to avoid a thrust from a lance, crept close to the wall and,
followed by Nick Garth and Ram Jennings, turned the end of the stones,
climbed on, and reached the stone-strewn cliffs behind.

Then, knowing that the two men, in their fierce energy and hate, would
be quite close, Mark turned suddenly, drew himself up, sword in hand--
his followers letting their pikes slip through their hands, and holding
them close up to the heads--and leaped down inside the breastwork, his
father simultaneously coming over at the other flank.

There was not much force in either attack, but it proved effectual by
its suddenness, throwing the defenders into confusion.

These rallied directly, and pikes were swung round and directed at the
flanking parties, but the momentary check gave the men in front the
opportunity to rush close up to the breastwork, which now became their
protection, the defenders, having fallen back, becoming in turn exposed.

The fight now became furious, for the marauders began to back toward the
mouth of the cave, giving way step by step, as the length of their line
was gradually contracted by one after another dashing in, till all had
passed into the narrow passage, the first men blocking the way with the
heads of their pikes, while their fellows stooped and crept beneath,
till the last was in safety.  It is needless to say that an attempt to
follow would have meant instant death.

A cheer now rose from the attacking party, who had achieved the taking
of the outwork, and Sir Edward forced his way to his son's side, to clap
him on the shoulder, as he stood just out of reach of the defenders'
bristling pikes, which effectually barred the way.

"We have them now, Mark," he cried.  "Pass the word there for Daniel
Rugg."

But a low growl on the other side of the wall told that there was no
need to pass any word.  As soon as he saw that there was a chance for
the next step, Dan had signed to Dummy, who trotted forward with
lantern, fuse, and powder-bag, and father and son climbed into the
little fort a few feet away from the opening into the cavern.

"Silence!" roared Sir Edward now--"you within there, lay down your arms,
and march out at once."

A defiant yell came from the holders of the pikes, enraging Nick Garth
to such an extent that he picked up a block of stone from the top of the
breastwork, raised it above his head, and dashed it into the doorway,
Ram Jennings following suit with another.

The stones crashed in among the pikes with plenty of rattling, and a
burst of yells followed as the men picked up a couple more.

"Stop, there," cried Sir Edward sternly.  "You can do no good, and I
want the wall left sound for our own protection."

Nick growled savagely, but he obeyed, and the men all stood fast at the
cavern's mouth with presented pikes, ready to attack if any movement was
made by the defenders, while Dan Rugg and his son quickly prepared their
missile.

"Ready," shouted Dan from where he stood inside the wall with, his back
to the men, and with Dummy looking intensely interested standing ready
with the lantern.

"You, in there," cried Sir Edward now, "will you surrender?"

"No," cried a hoarse voice from inside.  "Go back with your ragged pack
of hungry hounds, or we'll come and burn you out as we did the other
idiot."

"Once more," cried Sir Edward, who still hesitated to proceed to the
sternest measures; "will you give up your prisoners and surrender?"

"Bah!  Laugh at him, boys," cried the same hoarse voice: and another
derisive yell arose.

"Out with you, my lads," cried Sir Edward; and his men sprang over the
wall again.

"You too, Mark," said Sir Edward; and Mark followed, while Dan Rugg came
close up with his bag of powder and fuse carefully tied in.

"Lay it as near as you can, so as to be out of reach of the pikes."

"No good, Sir Edward," said the man in a husky whisper.  "Out with you.
I'm going to light the fuse, and go right close, and heave it in over
their pikes."

"But that is too dangerous for you."

"Not it.  I know to a quarter of a minute when it will fire, and I shall
hold it till then.  That'll give me time to jump the wall.  Quick, sir,
please."

It was no time for hesitation, and feeling that his old servant at the
mine could be trusted, Sir Edward climbed the wall, and Dummy, showing
his teeth in a satisfied grin, opened the door of the lantern.

The next moment Dan had held the end of the short fuse he had provided
to the candle, and a slight spluttering began.

"Over with you," growled Dan, as his son snapped to the lantern door.

"Take care of yourself, daddy," said the boy coolly.

"You be off," growled Dan, and Dummy placed the lantern on the top of
the breastwork, and vaulted over amongst the men, who were crouching
down behind, to be out of the blast.

All this had taken place unknown to the defenders, who, from the
narrowness of the entrance, were shut off from seeing the quaint,
sardonic face of the old miner, as he stood holding the bag, with the
burning fuse spluttering and sending up its curls of greyish smoke.

The men held their breath, and Mark's eyes dilated as he watched the
brave old fellow holding the bag, in the full knowledge that if he held
the powder a moment too long he must be shattered to pieces.

It was a combination of the familiarity which breeds contempt and the
confidence born of long experience which made Dan Rugg stand there so
coolly for what seemed to be a long time before turning as he watched
the burning fuse.

"Heads down there," he said suddenly; "she's going off."

There was a quick movement, but Mark felt as if he was held by a
nightmare dream, and he stood there watching, as the old man took a
couple of steps forward, and now for the first time in full sight of
those who held the fence of cross pikes.

In an instant there was a wild yell, and the pikes went down with their
heads to the stones, and disappeared, but it was as Dan Rugg raised the
bag above his head, and hurling it right into the cavern passage, he
started aside to the shelter of the wall, while now by a step aside Mark
also reached shelter.  Then there was a roar and a burst of flame and
smoke came as from the mouth of a cannon, and the men sprang up again to
cheer.

"Steady--steady!" cried Sir Edward.  "Now, my lads, over the wall with
you, and follow me; never mind the smoke.  Rugg, have another charge
ready; we shall want it soon."

"Ay, Sir Edward, that was a failure.  I didn't hold it long enough.
They had time to get away."

Sir Edward and his son entered the murk, and had to feel their way, and
halted.

"Light torches," cried Mark: and half-a-dozen were lit and passed in,
when once more the party advanced, expecting to be attacked, but the
blast had produced a scare, though it had done no serious harm, save
tearing down a few stones, and instead of attacking, the marauders stood
on their defence in the place familiar to Mark and some of the men.

There was again the same bristling array of pikes in the opening; and
after a renewed summons to surrender, the old miner proceeded coolly to
prepare a second bag of powder.

This was fired, but the explosion did not take place till some time
after the defenders of the cavern had retreated; and for a while the
passage was so stifling with the fumes that it was impossible to go on,
so the party had to draw back to allow them to be dissipated.

At last it was deemed prudent to proceed, and once more the advance was
ordered, the men eagerly obeying; and with torches adding their smoke to
that already hanging in the gloomy cracks and vaults, they pressed on
till once more the way was blocked.

It was no array of spear-points in a narrow passage, but in this case
the solid blocking of a wall of stone, built-up with care, the stones
well wedged in, a narrow opening left for the retreat of the defenders
having been filled up since their last retreat, and the wonder to those
who examined it was that it had been so quickly secured.

The choice of position, though, had been well made, for the passage was
not above four feet wide at this point, and the roof had sunk till it
was in this particular spot only five in height.

Once more the powder was brought forward by Dummy, the bag laid close to
the bottom stones, the fuse added, and lit, and the party retired to a
safe distance, to wait until the powder had swept the barrier away.

The explosion was long in coming, and when it did, with a mighty roar,
an hour had to be passed before another advance was made, but no farther
than the wall, which was found apparently quite uninjured, though the
powder had brought down a huge mass from the roof.

"Pull it down," said Sir Edward impatiently, and a couple of the men--
there was no room for more--attacked the well-fitted stones, but only
for one to start back with a cry of rage and pain, his hand to his side.

"Hurt?" cried Mark excitedly, and he ran to the man's aid, to be sent
staggering back by a heavy blow.

It was Sir Edward's turn to rush to his son, and he too reeled as he
received a thrust, but in the case of both, the pike-thrusts did not
penetrate their clothes, the point of the weapon having been turned,
unknown to the man who used it, by a thrust against the rock.

It was a warning, and throwing the light of the torches well upon the
built-up wall, a couple of the men found the holes through which the
thrusts had been made, and advancing cautiously to send their pikes
through, had to leap back again, for the enemy thrust at them.  Nick
struck in turn, though, and a yell of pain told that it was not without
effect.

"Keep back," cried Sir Edward, as his men advanced recklessly, and when
the wounded man had been drawn away and carried out, after a rough
bandage had been applied to his wound, Sir Edward turned to his son.

"You must be hurt, my boy," he whispered.

"I was, father, horribly."

"But I mean wounded."

"Only my doublet," said the lad merrily.  "What are we to do now?"

After a few moments' thought, as Nick Garth had been so able, Sir Edward
decided to let him try again, which he eagerly did, feigning so as to
draw a thrust from the enemy, and darting aside and close up to the
wall.  Then, as the man withdrew his pike, Nick, holding his own short,
thrust it through after it, and again there was a yell of pain, but
almost at the same moment Ram Jennings was just reached by a thrust
through another hole, and sprang back, roaring like a wild beast.

"Yah! don't howl like that," cried Nick angrily; "do as I do."

But poor Ram Jennings preferred to stand nursing his injured arm, and
watching his fellow ramming away with his pike, as if loading a gun,
till suddenly it was jerked out of his hand, and drawn through the wall.

"Look at that," he growled.  "Here, give's hold of another."

But Sir Edward ordered him back.

"It's of no use, my lad," he cried; "come away."

"All very well to say come away, captain," growled the man, as he stood
close up, "but if I stir, I shall get a hole through me."

Sir Edward saw the man's difficult position, and gave an order in a low
tone, when every man bearing a light ran back and round one of the
corners, leaving the cavern in darkness.

Nick took advantage thereof, and sprang away from his perilous position.
The rattle of a pike-staff against the stones told that a thrust had
been made at him in the darkness.

"Are you hit?" cried Mark anxiously.

"Ay, youngster, but on'y with the staff," growled Nick; and the order
for the lights to be brought back was given and obeyed.

"Another, Rugg," said Sir Edward laconically, and Dan, who had a bag
ready, primed with fuse, laid it on the stony floor, picked it up on the
point of a pike, and advanced to place it against the wall.

A couple of thrusts were made at it directly, but he lowered it, and the
enemy could not force their points down low enough to reach it.  But as
Dan placed it against the bottom of the wall the pikes were aimed now at
his breast.

"Back!" roared Sir Edward, as Mark rushed at the man to drag him away.

"All right, Master Mark," said Dan coolly; "my arms and my pike are as
long as theirs.  They can't reach me.  They've got all the thickness of
the wall to push through as well;" and he coolly placed the powder-bag
and arranged the fuse ready for being lighted.

"I did not think of that, Dan," said Mark.

"Ay, but I did," said the old fellow, chuckling.  "Now, Dummy, my boy,
son, bring a lighted torch."

Dummy trotted forward, and they heard a growl from beyond the wall, as
the miner thrust the point of his pike into the end of the torch, and
then reached out toward the fuse, but only succeeded in getting it
half-way before it was knocked off the point of his weapon.

"Ah, deal o' good that's done," growled Dan, trying to drive the point
of his pike into the torch again.  "There," he shouted, "run for it; I
can reach to pitch it up to the bag."

The men on the other side did not grasp the fact that if Dan did this
his companions would fare worse than they, but scuffled off at once,
their steps being plainly heard.

"Fools!" growled Dan, and stepping forward, he picked up the torch, went
close up to the wall, and touched the end of the fuse, which began to
sparkle at once.

"Plenty o' time, Sir Edward," he said coolly, "if you'll now order us
back."

The order was given, and as it was obeyed, Sir Edward and his son
retiring last, they saw Nick Garth step close up to old Dan and pat him
on the shoulder.

"You're a cool one, mate," he said.  "I never see one as cool as you."

Dan chuckled a little, and all went along the narrow passage and into
the chamber beyond, well out of reach of the blast, and waited.

It was a good two minutes before the explosion took place, and Mark had
made perfectly sure that the fuse had gone out, when there was a
sensation as if his breath was being sucked away, then a deafening roar,
followed by a crash.

Again they had to wait till the fumes had somewhat dispersed.  Then,
with Sir Edward and Mark leading, they returned, expecting to see the
wall demolished; but as far as they could see it was perfectly sound,
while another huge mass from the roof had come down, to lie piled up
before it, so that there was hardly room for a man to crawl over the
heap, so close was it to the roof.

"It's of no use, Mark," whispered Sir Edward, as they drew back a little
from the smoke, "we must devise some other plan.  It is useless to try
another bag there without first clearing away the mass of stones, and we
can only do that at the expense of many men wounded by pike-thrusts,
perhaps killed."

"Yes," said Mark, "and it doesn't seem fair to order them to do it."

"I cannot, my boy.  There, we have done our work for this time.  Let's
get out of this horrible smoke."

"Hoi, you!" came from beyond the wall; "if you fire any more of that
choke-dog stuff, I'll give orders to my men to kill the prisoners,
'specially the girl."

"You cowardly ruffian!" cried Mark, in a rage.

"Bah!  Puppy!" came back scornfully.

"Don't answer, boy," said Sir Edward softly.

"But father!--if--"

"It is only a boast.  They dare not do such a thing as that.  Come."

They retired, making for the mouth of the cavern, where the cool night
air blew with refreshing force.

"But we cannot give up, father," cried Mark.

"I am not going to give up, my boy," said Sir Edward quietly.  "When an
assault upon a stronghold fails, a general tries to starve his enemy
into submission.  We must do the same here.  Unfortunately they must
have stores, and they have a good supply of water from a spring within
there.  But still we must try.  The first thing is to protect ourselves
from a sudden attack, and this will be easy.  Now, my lads, every man
take in a block of stone, and carry it into the cavern as far as the end
of the first chamber.  Take these from the breastwork; we do not want it
now, for we shall encamp inside."

Mark nodded approval, and the men, glad that the night's fighting was at
an end, set to work with a will, after laying their arms aside; and in
less than an hour had walled up to a great thickness the narrow exit
from the cavern, wedging in the top stones with blows, and in spite of
the want of mortar producing a good solid piece of work, through which
no pikes could be thrust.

This done, Sir Edward reduced his force to one-third, this being plenty
to defend the wall should it be attacked from the inner side; and the
rest were sent back to the Tor Castle, for provisions and blankets.

"Now, Mark, lad," said Sir Edward, "the thing to consider is, how long
can the enemy hold out?"

"Not long, father," replied the lad; "they cannot have a very good
supply."

"That," said Sir Edward, "remains to be proved."



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

PREPARATIONS FOR A SIEGE.

Siege was now commenced, Ergles being to all intents and purposes an
impregnable natural castle.  Provisions and other necessaries were
brought up, and the force was divided into three watches, who regularly
mounted guard in the chamber in front of the wall.  But the whole of the
next day passed without a sound being heard, the enemy not attempting to
break down their own side, for fear of getting into a trap, the utter
stillness being interpreted to mean a _ruse_ to get them to make an
opening through which an attack would be made.

Then another day was passed, and still all was quiet; but toward the
middle of the next those on guard in the chamber heard, and reported to
Mark, that they could hear the distant sound of stones rolling down, and
Mark went and listened so as to determine whether his father ought to be
roused, for after a very long watch he had lain down upon a blanket to
sleep.

"I wouldn't call un, Master Mark," said Dan.  "He's tired enough.
Watches twice to our once.  Let the hounds come; we could account for
'em if they tried to pull our wall down."

"Well, it would be plenty of time to awaken my father if they came and
tried," said Mark.  "Look here, then, we'll wait; and let it be in
perfect silence, so that we may hear if they come as far as the other
side of the wall."

The men were as obedient to his orders as to those of Sir Edward, and
they all sat or lay about, with their weapons close to their hands,
listening in the darkness, the calm and silence being good for thought;
and before long Mark's brain was at work thinking about the state of
affairs at the castle, to which he had been three times since the siege
began, to see his sister and learn how Ralph Darley was progressing.

The news was always bad, Master Rayburn shaking his head and looking
very serious.

"Bad hurts, Mark, boy," he said, "bad hurts.  I hope, please God, he may
be spared; but I have my fears."

"Master Rayburn!" cried Mark wildly.  "Oh! you must not--you shall not
let the brave fellow die."

"I'd give my poor old life to save his," said the old man sadly.  "We
can only wait and hope."

And as Mark sat in the dark natural chamber formed in the old limestone
hill, he recalled Ralph's white, fire-scarred face, looking pale and
unnaturally drawn, and wondered that he should feel so low-spirited
about one who was an enemy and almost a stranger, till his musings were
interrupted by a dull sound on the other side of the wall--a sound which
came after the long period of utter silence which had succeeded to the
noise made by forcing out and rolling down stones.

No one else heard the faint sound, and setting it down to fancy, Mark
was thinking again about the prisoners within, and wondering what
treatment they were receiving from the enemy.

It seemed hard enough for Sir Morton Darley, but Mark could not help
feeling how terrible it must be for a delicately sensitive girl.

Then once more he heard that sound, which he felt sure could only be
caused by a foot kicking against a stone.

Just then there was a faint rustling, a hand was laid upon his arm, and
Dummy whispered:

"Hear that, Master Mark?"

"Yes.  Don't talk," whispered Mark, and the two lads, who were well upon
the alert, listened in perfect silence, till all at once there was a
faint gleam of light, so feeble that it could hardly be distinguished,
but there it was, close to the roof, and Mark was satisfied that it must
come over the top of their defensive wall.

Then all was still for a minute or two, till the two mentally saw what
was taking place--some one was passing his hands over the built-up
stones, and trying whether one of them could be dislodged.

Then all was still again, and the light died out.

It was not till hours after that any further sound was heard, and this
time Sir Edward was awake and about, passing from the dark chamber where
the sentries were on guard to the light outside, and back again.

Mark went with him, and Sir Edward had just happened to say in a
whisper:

"All quiet enough now," when a voice, apparently close to his elbow,
said hoarsely:

"No.  I'm not going to walk into a trap."

There was a good deal in those few words, for to Mark, among other
things, they meant that if the speaker was not going to walk into a
trap, it was because he must have food enough to last him for some time
longer, and was not willing to lay down his arms.



CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

DUMMY RUGG HAS THE THINKS.

The blockade was strictly kept up at the mouth of the cavern, Sir Edward
having cast aside, at all events for the time being, every feeling of
enmity; and in spite of the many disappointments, he grew day by day
more determined to rout out the gang, and rescue their prisoners.  "Only
tell me what to do, Mark, my boy, and if it is possible, it shall be
done.  If we go on blasting the place we shall end by shutting them in
beyond recovery," said Sir Edward, "a good enough thing to do as far as
the ruffians are concerned, but we shall destroy Sir Morton Darley and
his child."

"I can't think of anything, father," said Mark, gloomily.  "I suppose we
can only wait."

"That is the conclusion I always come to, my boy.  All we can do is to
be perfectly ready for the moment when, utterly desperate, they will
surrender or break out."

"I hope they'll fight, father," said Mark grimly.  "Why?"

"Because it would be so horrible for them to surrender.  I'd rather see
them die fighting."

"Yes," said Sir Edward, frowning heavily.  "Hanging prisoners was all
very well a hundred years ago.  We don't want to do that sort of thing
nowadays.  There, run over to the Tor, and see how things are going.
You need not hurry back.  Tell Mary I shall come myself to-morrow, and
that I'm getting very tired of sleeping in a cavern."

"But suppose the men try to break out while I'm gone, father."

"Well, if they do, I shall have all the honour of the fight."

"But I shall not like that," said Mark.

"I might say the same to you to-morrow, my boy," said Sir Edward,
smiling.  "Go and see how young Darley is; we cannot give up everything
to this business."

Mark started for home, leaving his father with a strong enough guard to
master the men if they attempted to escape; and before he had gone fifty
yards, Dummy came trotting after his young master like a dog.

"Hullo! what is it, Dummy?" cried Mark, stopping short.

"Only coming home with you, Master Mark.  Saw you, and father said he
didn't want me."

"Oh, very well.  Getting tired of it?"

"Ever so, Master Mark.  I liked it when we were firing the powder, or
having a bit of a fight, but it's so stupid to be doing nothing but sit
down and watch a wall, like dogs after rabbits that won't ever come."

"Yes," said Mark, with a sigh, "it is weary work."

"Father says he don't believe they'll ever come."

"But they must, when they've finished their food."

"He says they've got such lots.  They've been at work, he says, for
twenty miles round, as he knows, and they've stored up sacks of meal and
corn, and sides of bacon, and hams, and pickle-tubs of pork.  There
aren't no end to the stuff they've got, and then they've plenty of good
water, both warm and cold."

"Oh, don't talk about it," cried Mark; "it makes me feel as bad as can
be."

Dummy settled down into the mood which originated his name during the
rest of the way, and the lads parted as they reached the Tor, Dummy to
go down the steps to the mine to see how everything looked, and report
to his father upon his return, and Mark to hurry up to his room, where
Ralph Darley lay insensible still, and where he had a very warm
reception from his sister and Master Rayburn.

"Then you have taken the place at last, Mark," cried Mary.

"No," said the lad, frowning, "and we're not likely to take it.  I say,
Master Rayburn, isn't he a long time getting better?"

"Yes," said the old man gravely, "and perhaps after all it is a mercy
that he remains insensible.  Poor fellow! it would be horrible for him,
in his weak state, to lie fretting because he could not go to the help
of his father and sister."

Mark conveyed his message about Sir Edward's intentions for the
following day, and he was bending down over the sufferer's pillow,
thinking how very much he was changed, when there was a tap at the door,
and an announcement that Dummy Rugg must see Master Mark directly.

"I must go, Mary," said Mark excitedly.  "Some one has come over after
us."

"Oh Mark!" cried the girl, looking startled, and clinging to him.

"Don't do that," cried the lad.  "Be brave; I'll take all the care I
can."

"Yes," said Master Rayburn to him, with a sad smile, "you will take all
the care you can.  I know what you are, Mark, but do try, boy, not to be
rash."

Mark promised, and hurried down and out into the courtyard; but there
was no Dummy visible till he had passed the second, and found him seated
on a block of stone, whistling, and swinging his legs to and fro.

"What is it? some one come to fetch us?" cried Mark excitedly.

"No: nobody aren't come," said the boy, looking at him fixedly.

"Then why did you send for me?" cried Mark angrily.

"'Cause I wanted you, Master Mark, very bad indeed."

"Here, what do you mean?  What's the matter with you?"

"Got the thinks, very bad."

"Dummy!"

"Yes, Master Mark, I was took with 'em as soon as I got as far as the
powder store.  It all come at once."

"What do you mean?"

Dummy was perfectly silent, but not perfectly still; for as he stared
straight in Mark's face in a peculiarly stolid way, he kept on swinging
and jerking his legs till he seemed as if some one was pulling a string
to make him act like a jumping toy.

"Look here, stupid-head," cried Mark angrily, but only to break into a
laugh, half of amusement, half of vexatious contempt, "are you going
mad?"

"I dunno, Master Mark.  Perhaps I am.  There's something keeps on
buzzing in my head like a wheel going round."

"You've been out too much in the sun."

"No, I aren't.  I've been down the mine in the dark."

"And got frightened?"

"Not as I knows on, Master Mark.  It's the thinks."

"Here, what do you mean, thick-head?  I can't stop here listening to
your nonsense."

"'Taren't nonsense, Master Mark," said the boy, giving him a peculiar
stare.

"What is it, then?"

"I want to know where that water goes to yonder in the mine."

"What! do you mean to say you've had me fetched out to tell me that?"

Dummy nodded, and Mark doubled his fist.

"I've got it, Master Mark."

"Got what, you idiot?"

"We're up ever so much higher here than they are at Ergles, yonder,
aren't we?"

"Higher?  Of course," said Mark, looking at the lad curiously; "but what
of that?"

"That's what I wanted you to tell me, Master Mark, and that's it then."

"What's what then?"

"Why, that water in the mine where we went along, and was under us when
we went to sleep--that goes along under ground, right under the
moorland, and it comes out again in Ergles Dale."

"Do you think it goes in that direction?"

Dummy nodded.

"Well, but suppose it does, what then?"

"I'm sure it does now, Master Mark, and what the thinks have made me
see's this: if you and me had kept going on instead of sitting down, and
eating and drinking till we went fas' asleep, we should have found
ourselves in Ergles Hole, and if it hadn't been for the Purlrose gang,
we might have worked back 'bove ground."

"Why, Dummy!  I don't know--yes, if it's that way--goes for miles.  I
say, perhaps you're right."

"Yes, I'm right," said the boy quietly; "but you don't jump about a bit:
you aren't glad."

"Glad?  Jump about?  Why should I?  Oh!"

"Haw--haw--haw!" laughed Dummy.  "He can see it now.  Why, it come to
me, Master Mark, like a flash of lightning."

"Oh, Dummy, I'll never call you a thick-head again," cried Mark
excitedly.

"Why not?  May if you like: I don't mind."

"Then you think," cried the lad, who was trembling now with excitement,
"that we might get into Ergles through our mine?"

"Sure I do--all along them grotters and passages."

"And take the ruffians by surprise?"

"Ketch 'em asleep, Master Mark.  They'd never think of our coming
behind, like."

Mark seized the boy by the shoulders, and shook him as hard as ever he
could.

"Why, you stupid old, ugly old, cleverest fellow that ever was!  Why
didn't you think of this before?"

"Couldn't, Master Mark," cried the boy, grinning as if he were
determined to display every tooth in his head; "it never come till this
morning.  Right, aren't I?"

"Right!  You must be.  But suppose we can't get all the way?"

"Water does.  Sure to be plenty of room.  See how there always was."

"Hurrah!  Then we'll go at once."

"What, us two?"

"Of course!"

"We couldn't fight all that lot.  Six to one!"

"No; we must go and tell my father at once."

"That's best way," said Dummy, jumping off the stone.  "Come on," and
they started off at once for the tiny camp, discussing the possibility
of the men finding the way through.

"Suppose they got into the mine, and attacked the Black Tor while we're
away?"

"No fear o' that, Master Mark," said Dummy, with another of his nice
open smiles.  "Not many folk as would go and do what we did."

"No, I suppose not," said Mark thoughtfully.

"I'm sort of used to it, Master Mark, from always being down the mine,
and always wanting to see where every hole went.  No, I don't think any
o' them would care to go.  Too big and clumsy.  They'd never get there."



CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

PLAYING MOLE.

Sir Edward met them as they ascended the slope, Mark having been taking
mental notes all the way of the trend of the hills and the valley,
seeing for certain that, in spite of its bulk and height, Ergles was a
good deal lower than the range along the valley of the Gleame.

Their narrative of adventure below was listened to in silence, and Sir
Edward grew moment by moment more interested till the whole was told.

"I don't think there is a doubt of it," he said.  "We are quite three
hundred feet lower here, and in all probability it is the same
underground stream as we have at the Tor; but whether it will be
possible to get right through into this cavern is more than we can judge
till we have tried."

"But you will try, father?"

"Of course, my boy," cried Sir Edward; "and at once.  Here, we must have
Daniel Rugg, and hear what he says."

Dummy fetched his father, who listened in turn without a word.

"Sounds well, Rugg," said Sir Edward.

"Yes, Sir Edward; sounds well."

"But is the grotto likely to run so far?"

"Lots on 'em do.  There's one yonder up in the Peak as goes for miles,
and they've never yet found the end, nor where the water goes."

"Well," said Sir Edward, after a few minutes' thought; "I'm afraid to be
too sanguine.  This may all end in disappointment; but it shall be
tried."

"Now, at once, I s'pose, Sir Edward?"

"Now, at once."

Ten men were chosen for the expedition, and Mark noted with satisfaction
that Dan Rugg put forward those who had been accustomed to work in the
mine.

"Better for getting along, Master Mark," said the miner, on seeing that
Mark took notice of his action.

"But will ten be enough, Dan?"

"Why not, sir?  Ten, and me and Dummy's twelve, and you and Sir Edward
fourteen.  Well, perhaps it would be as well to have a couple more."

Garth and Jennings were selected without having the slightest notion of
where they were going, but they took their places without a word, only
too glad to have some change from the monotonous existence they had been
leading for many days.

No embargo was placed upon their way of marching, and they tramped
eagerly on, till the occupants of the Castle were startled by their
sudden arrival, to share in the surprise of their fellows when orders
were given for rations to be supplied to each man, after a good meal had
been eaten.

Half-an-hour after, well provided with picks, hammers, big nails for
driving in the cracks, either for foot-hold or to bear ropes, the whole
party were descending into the mine, with Dummy promoted, from his
knowledge, to the onerous post of guide, leading, and Mark by his side
or following next, according to the state of the way.

The men were in excellent spirits, for by this time the object of the
expedition had oozed out, and it gave them a feeling of confidence now
that the attack was to be made through the mine, where they were all
much at home.

There was the rumour, too, that they were to take the enemy by surprise
where there would be no barricades or breastworks, and altogether the
men moved on after their young guides in the highest of spirits, feeling
as they did that at last the petty war was to be brought to a
conclusion.

The ways through the old galleries and chambers of the mine were
traversed with the men talking and laughing, and reminding one another
of this or that particular working where the lead ore was rich; and
Dummy strode in front, bearing his lantern well, and his importance ill.
For he was to all intents and purposes the originator and head man of
the little campaign, till suddenly casting his eyes sidewise he caught
sight of Mark looking at him in an amused way, which discharged all his
conceit upon the instant, as he flushed up and changed back to the old
Dummy at once.

"You shouldn't laugh at a poor fellow, Master Mark," he remonstrated in
a whisper.

"Then you shouldn't strut along like a game-cock just come in for his
spring feathers."

"I didn't," said Dummy angrily.

"You did.  But go on.  I will not laugh at you any more."

A complete change came over the boy, and he went on gravely enough after
the reproof, till, to the surprise of all, they were led into the
chamber hung with the veils of stalactite, where Dummy stopped and
looked round.

"Well, my lad, what does this mean?"

Dummy smiled in a rather imbecile way, and his father nudged him heavily
with his elbow.

"Don't you hear what Sir Edward says?  What you come here for?  Lost
your way?"

"No, I aren't lost my way, father."

"Then go back and show us.  Where is it?  Down by the old workings?"

"Nay, this is right," said the boy, in high glee at his father's puzzled
look; and giving Sir Edward a wave of the hand, he went on to the end,
and passed behind the stony veil dropping from near the roof.

Sir Edward, uttered an ejaculation, and turned to his son.

"You have been by here, then?" he cried.

"Yes, father; this is the way," replied Mark.  "Follow him."

"No, keep with him yourself," said Sir Edward.  "You are the guides.
But be silent now."

"There is no need yet," replied Mark; "we have a tremendously long way
to go yet."

"Let there be silence," said Sir Edward sternly.  "For aught we know,
these men, if the grottoes do communicate, may be exploring on their own
account, and sound runs curiously along these passages."

Mark accepted the rebuke, and joined Dummy at once, the rest of the
party followed, and at a word from Sir Edward, raised their pikes and
advanced steadily, as if expecting at any moment to meet the foe.

But many hours seemed to have elapsed, during which they had climbed,
descended, squeezed through narrow upright cracks, and crawled, as the
two lads had crawled before, ere they reached the limpid pool where
their guides had rested and gone to sleep.

Here, at a word from Mark, Sir Edward gave the word to halt for
refreshment, while, in company with the two lads, he made a farther
advance, and planted two men at intervals along the route they took,
following the flow of the underground stream, whose musical gurgling
grew very plain at times.

The second man was posted a good two hundred yards beyond the first, and
made no objection to being left in the dark, showing Dan Rugg's wisdom
in selecting miners for the task in hand.

Then, silently and with great caution, Dummy led on along a wild chasm
of the same nature as others they had passed, and formed, evidently
during some convulsion, the encrinite marble of which the walls were
composed matching exactly, and merely requiring lateral pressure and the
trickling of lime-charged water to become solid once again.

About three hundred yards beyond the last sentinel the trio paused, and
stood listening and gazing as far as they could across a rock chamber
whose sides glittered with double prismatic crystals.

But there was the water gurgling at the bottom of the deep crack along
which they passed--nothing more; and they returned toward the pool, Sir
Edward giving the men a word or two of caution, and then passing on to
the others who were whispering to each other as they ate their food.

It was too good an example not to be followed, and soon after, quite
refreshed, Sir Edward gave the order for a fresh start, the way being
doubly interesting now that it was all fresh ground to the guides.  In
addition, it became more difficult, for the formation began now to
change, and instead of being a succession of narrow crack-like
passages--in almost every variety of inclination between the horizontal
and perpendicular, and rock grotto-like chambers of varying extent--the
road began to fork and break up into vast halls, from which more than
once they could hardly find an exit.

But Dummy was invaluable, and there was a kind of triumph in his face
when he pointed out how easy it was to go on if you listened for the
trickling of the stream below.

At last, after passing through a long succession of scenes that were as
wondrous as strange, Sir Edward called upon the boy to stop, and upon
Dummy coming back to his side, lantern in hand, "Do you think you can
find your way back?" he asked.

"Yes, with my eyes shut," said the boy, smiling.

His tones chased away his master's feeling of uneasiness, and he went
on:

"That's a good boy; but what about your notion of this place leading
into the cavern where those ruffians are?  We must be far past Ergles,
even if we are in the right direction."

"No," said Dummy confidently, as his father, who now came up, lantern in
hand, looked doubtful too.

"Why do you say no, boy?" said Sir Edward.

"Because we've got among the same sort of rock as you find at Ergles."

"Good, lad!" burst out Dan Rugg.  "That's minding your teachings.  But
are you right?"

"Yes, father: look," said the boy, holding up his lantern toward the
glittering roof of the hall in which they stood.  "There it is: Blue
John."

Dan raised his lantern too, and drew his miner's pick from his belt.

_Chink_, _clash_.

There was a sharp blow from the pick, and Dan stooped to take up the
piece of rock he had struck off, and handed it to his lord.

"Boy's right, Sir Edward," he said.  "Look at that."

"But what has Blue John, whoever he is--Oh, pish!  I had forgotten the
name of the blue spar.  Is there any of it in Ergles?"

"Only place about here where there is any, Sir Edward, and that's a
piece."

"Then we may be close to the cavern," said Sir Edward, lowering his
voice.

"Or in it, perhaps," said Mark excitedly.

He started, for at that moment Dummy clapped a hand upon his lips, and
pointed forward.

"Cover your lanterns," he whispered.

The word was passed along back, and the next moment they were standing
in darkness, watching a faint gleam of light in the distance.

It was playing upon the glittering prismatic crystals which covered
wall, roof, and floor, and these flashed as the light played upon them,
disappeared, and came into sight again from behind a Gothic pillar, was
again eclipsed, and once more came into sight; and now, plainly seen,
they made out that it was the light of a lantern, which shone upon a
man's face as he went slowly along what seemed to be an opening, which
led him past where they stood watching.

Then the light seemed to go down toward the floor, lower and lower, as
it went on till it passed out of sight, but left a faint glow.

"Let Dummy and me go," whispered Mark to his father.

"Yes.  Cautiously.  Don't be seen."

Dummy was panting to be off, and keeping his lantern hidden, he felt his
way onward toward the glow, keeping tightly hold of Mark's hand, till,
as they came nearer, they saw that the man must have been descending a
steep rift, and as the light came into sight again, they found that they
were standing on the very edge of this place, and that the light was
away to their left, twenty feet or so lower, and gleaming upon the
surface of a smooth far-spreading pool.



CHAPTER THIRTY.

NEARING DAWN.

The two lads stood there motionless for a time, wondering what the
lantern-bearer could be doing, for he evidently had no suspicion of his
being watched.  Then as they saw that in place of gleaming over the
water, the lantern was once more in motion, they crouched down, with
their eyes alone over the edge of the clean-cut chasm, feeling that
whoever it was must pass just beneath them, when they would be able to
see which way he went, and so gain a clue to the robbers' hold.

The light came nearer, and it was plain that whoever bore it was coming
very slowly, but they grasped the reason directly, for he was passing
over a flooring of slippery crystals, and as he came on they could hear
him breathing hard.

As they had anticipated, he came very close beneath them, and Mark felt
that if he looked up they would be seen.  But he whom they watched
walked stooping, and letting the light fall upon the glittering
ascending floor, so that at last he was not six feet below them, and
Mark said in a quick whisper: "Sir Morton!"

"Great Heavens!" came back in company with a sharp crash, as of an
earthenware pitcher falling in shivers upon the rocky floor.

"Hush!"

"Who is it?"

"Friends," whispered Mark.

"Thank Heaven!  At last--at last," came up, with a piteous groan, and
they heard a heavy fall.

"Quick, Dummy," whispered Mark.  "We must go down to him."

"Listen first," said the boy: "p'r'aps some one heard."

But as he spoke there was the sound of a hoarse laugh from a long
distance off, and Dummy whispered: "Didn't hear.  Been to fetch water,
and broke the pitcher.  I say, Master Mark, wasn't I right?"

Mark made no reply, for he was lowering himself down over the edge, and
directly after he dropped on to the crystals below.

"Show the light, Dummy," he whispered, and the boy lay face downward and
swung the lantern down as far as he could reach.

As Mark touched the fallen man's hand he began to recover consciousness.

"Not a dream--not a dream," he murmured.  "Whoever you are, have you
come to help?"

"Yes; but hush!  Purlrose and his men--are they near?"

"Too far to hear us speak; but hide your lights.  Now tell me, are you
one of those who attacked these wretches?"

"Yes; and we have reached you at last."

"Ah!" sighed the prisoner.  "It was time--it was time.  I don't know
your voice; I could not see your face; but if you know, tell me, for
mercy's sake--my poor boy--was he killed?"

"No.  Badly wounded, but alive, and he will live."

Mark heard the prostrate man muttering, and felt the hand he grasped
trembling violently.

"It puts life into me," he whispered, "when I was nearly spent.  Tell
me--pray tell me--where is my boy!  Not a prisoner?"

"No: safe with us, at the Black Tor."

"Safe--at the Black Tor!" faltered Sir Morton.  "Then you are an Eden?"

"Of course: and my father is close by here with a dozen stout men to
punish these villains and save you, and--you do not say anything about
your child."

There was no reply, and Mark pressed the hand he held, to find that
there was no response, and that it was turning wet and cold, for the
unfortunate prisoner had been unable to bear the tidings, and had
swooned away.

"Go back," whispered Mark, "and tell my father whom we have found."

"Leave the light?" said the boy.

"No, take it.  Tell him all you have heard."

The light glided away, and the next minute a faint sigh told that Sir
Morton was regaining his senses, his complete recovery thereof being
announced by a trembling pressure of the hand.

"Weak," he whispered.  "I was badly wounded.  So Heaven has sent my
greatest enemy to save us."

"Us?" cried Mark excitedly.  "Then Ralph Darley's sister is safe."

"Will be, I pray," said Sir Morton feebly.  "I, her father, can do no
more."

Sir Edward came up, in company with Dan Rugg and five men, approaching
cautiously with one lantern; and they were in the act of descending to
Mark and the prisoner when a hoarse bullying voice was heard from a
distance, the words echoing and reverberating as along a vaulted
passage.

"Now then, back to your den, old fool.  Don't be a week fetching that
water."

"I--I am going back," cried Sir Morton, and then in a whisper--"the
light--the light.  I will soon return."

He caught at the lantern, and began to move off painfully, while his
would-be rescuers stood watching till the light disappeared round a
corner, and a minute later the same harsh voice was heard speaking
fiercely.  Then all was still.

"Hah!" whispered Sir Edward, "at last.  Keep all lights covered, Rugg,
and go and bring up the rest of the men."

Dan grunted, and they heard his steps as they stood listening.  Twice
over there came the hoarse sound of laughter, but Sir Morton did not
return, and Sir Edward in his impatience was about to order a movement
forward, now that all his men were at hand, when from out of the black
darkness, close by where Mark stood listening with every nerve upon the
strain, the lad heard a slight rustling, then a faint panting sound as
of hasty breathing, and a low voice whispered: "Is any one there?
Please speak."

"Yes, yes," whispered Mark, and he stepped forward quickly with
outstretching hands, which came in contact with one as cold as ice.

"Oh!" gasped its owner, as another hand felt for him and clung to him.
"I know your voice, Mark Eden.  I am Minnie Darley: pray, pray come and
help my father; he is too weak to come back to you."

The voice trailed off into a wail.

"Hush!  Don't, pray don't cry," whispered Mark.  "Can you guide us to
where your father is?"

"Yes; oh yes."

"In the darkness?"

"Yes, I can find my way."

"Can you lead us, my child, to where these ruffians are?" said Sir
Edward, who had approached.  "We must surprise and make them prisoners
first."

"Yes--no, you will kill them," whispered the girl.  "It is too
treacherous and dreadful."

"My child," said Sir Edward gently, and he stretched his hand forward
till he could touch the girl's head, upon which he softly laid his hand;
"I have a girl as young and fair as you, and Heaven forbid that she
should ever be called upon to perform such an act.  But think: it is to
save your father's life; to save you from the hands of these treacherous
ruffians.  You must be our guide."

There was a dead silence for a few moments, and Sir Edward felt his hand
taken and held to two soft lips.

"Yes," came gently; "it is to save my poor father.  He will die in this
terrible place; and I must die too.  You do not know, and they would
easily kill you if you went without.  Yes, I will guide you to where
they are.  I feel that I must."



CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

THE WASPS' NEST.

There was a sound in the darkness as if several men had drawn a deep
breath together, and then for a few moments all was very still, so still
that Mark started when he heard his father's voice, and felt strange and
wondered to hear the gentle tones in which he spoke.

"Do you feel that you can guide us all without lights?"

"Oh, yes; I have been so long in the dark, and have often come with my
father to fill the pitcher in that pool below."

"Rugg, you and your boy stay back, and keep the lights hidden," said Sir
Edward firmly.

"Oh!" cried the old miner, in a tone full of protest; and then hastily:
"Right, Sir Edward."

"And be ready to bring the lanterns, and come to our help when called."

Dan Rugg growled his assent, but Dummy murmured angrily.

"Join yourselves together, my lads," whispered Sir Edward, "by carrying
your pikes each with the head upon the shoulder of the man before him--
the man behind me to rest his in the same way as I lead.  Ready?"

"Ay!" came in a low growl from out of the darkness.

"One word more," said Sir Edward sternly, and his words sent a thrill
through Mark.  "If the enemy surrenders, show mercy now: if he does not,
remember not a man must escape."

A low deep murmur, full of hatred against the destroyers of their homes,
came from the miners, and then in the renewed silence Sir Edward said
sharply:

"Mark, take this poor child's other hand, and protect her when I am
away.  Now forward."

A little soft cold hand closed tightly upon Mark's, as he stepped to
Minnie's side; and then slowly and silently the party advanced under the
girl's guidance for quite two hundred yards through what seemed to be
solid darkness, out of which her voice came in a low whisper from time
to time.

"Stoop here--a little to the right--to the right once more--now through
this narrow opening on the left.  Only one can pass at a time: you
first."

Mark led, and passed through a rift, to see a feeble glow upon his left,
where a candle was stuck against the rock, and beneath it lay a figure,
very dimly-seen, while, apparently coming through an opening farther on,
they heard the low hoarse sound of voices; and words came suggesting
that the speakers were engaged in some game of chance.

Minnie withdrew her hands from her protectors, and hurried to kneel down
by the figure in the corner, Sir Edward and Mark following, to bend over
the prisoner.

"Too weak," he panted--"I tried to come.  Eden!  A strange meeting, oh
mine enemy!  God forgive us all the past; and if when you--come back--a
conqueror--for the sake of Him who died--protect my child.--Minnie!" he
cried faintly, and the girl sank beside him with a wail.

Sir Edward went down on one knee, sought for, and took his enemy's hand.

"Can you hear?" he whispered.

A feeble pressure was the answer.

"Trust me.  I will.  Now we are in complete ignorance of the place, and
must be guided so as to succeed."

"You need no guidance," said Sir Morton feebly.  "Cross yonder--there is
an opening: follow the narrow passage for twenty yards, and there is a
big chamber-like grotto, and upon your right an archway leading into
another smaller chamber.  The enemy--are there.  You have them as in a
trap."

Sir Morton Darley's voice grew a little firmer as he proceeded, and when
he, ceased there was a low murmur of satisfaction, and the men's faces,
dimly-seen, were turned to Sir Edward for the order to advance.

"Lay your pikes in that corner," he whispered.  "It will be close
quarters.  Draw your swords."

The order had hardly been executed when there came suddenly angry
shouts, sounding hollow and strange, multiplied as they were by
reverberations.

"They know we are here, father," whispered Mark excitedly.  But at that
moment came distinctly the words:

"He cheated!  A thief!" and the clashing of swords.

"Forward!" said Sir Edward, and closely followed by his son and Nick
Garth, whose breath came thickly, he followed the directions given by
Sir Morton Darley, guided more by the sounds, to reach the entrance to a
natural chamber, with high Gothic roof and walls glittering with
crystals, which reflected the light of half--a--dozen candles stuck here
and there.

Mark saw all this at a glance, as he grasped the fact that the inmates
had broken into two parties, and were contending so fiercely that for a
few moments they did not see the doorway crowded with angry
countenances, and were only brought to a knowledge of their peril by the
rush that was made by all but two of Sir Edward's men, who stayed back
to guard the entry and cut off the escape of any who tried to get away.

The encounter was short and fierce, Sir Edward's men dashing forward
like a wedge, striking with all their might; and at the end of a couple
of minutes' savage encounter, the mercenaries fighting like rats at bay,
there was a terrible silence, broken only by muttered curses and groans,
while eight men stood erect, half of whom had cast away their swords and
fought with their miners' picks.

The scene was ghastly, as shown by two only of the candles, the rest
having been knocked down in the struggle.

"Hurt, Mark?" cried Sir Edward from the far end, where he stood sword in
hand, supporting himself by the wall, and with his foot resting upon the
burly body of Captain Purlrose.

"Not much, father," panted the lad.  "Bit of a cut."

"How many escaped?  I saw three make for the door."

"None, master," growled Nick Garth, who was upon the floor at the right.
"There they lay: those brave lads brought 'em down."

"Shout for the lanterns, Mark, boy," cried Sir Edward; and Mark reeled
as he stepped over the bodies lying in the way.

His call was responded to directly by Dan Rugg and his son, both
standing aghast for a few moments before energetically setting to work
to help their friends, who, saving the two who had guarded the entrance,
were wounded to a man, while of Captain Purlrose's party, four and their
leader were dead, the others lying disabled to wait their turn of help
from their captors, who, now that the rage of battle was at an end, were
ready to show mercy to their wounded foes.

Sir Edward was so badly hurt that after a brave struggle he had to give
up, and leave the ordering of the work now necessary to his son, who
began by having his father borne to the chamber where Minnie crouched,
trembling with horror, by her half-insensible father's side; but upon
being reassured by the information that her captivity was at an end, she
revived, and devoted herself to helping the wounded with all a true
woman's zeal.

Mark's next task was to go with Dan Rugg and Dummy to the entrance,
wondering the while at the extent of the place and the hoard of all
necessaries which the fellows had collected in the cavern.

Upon reaching the wall beyond which the guard were stationed, still in
perfect ignorance of what had taken place within, a few shouts set the
men to work, the defence was rapidly demolished, and the wounded were
borne out into the light--a ghastly procession, though not a man
murmured; and as soon as they were laid upon the heather, began to chat
eagerly together about the success of the underground expedition.

As for the wounded prisoners, they were kept under guard in the
chamber--where the wall had just been destroyed.

The two great enemies were borne out last; and as Mark followed with the
trembling girl upon his arm, he looking proud and satisfied, in spite of
a stained bandage upon his forehead, and she with her face unnaturally
white and her eyes closed, unable to bear the light after so long an
imprisonment in the depths of the cavern, Nick Garth raised himself upon
his elbow and uttered a shout which rose into a rousing cheer.

"God bless you, Mistress Minnie!" cried the man hoarsely, "and you too,
youngster.  You're a brave lad, and I'll never call you an enemy again."

"Humph!  No," said Dan Rugg, who was close to him.  "I s'pose all that's
dead as mutton now.  Look here, Nick Garth, I never see a man who could
fight as well as you, and if you'd got a decent paw I'd say shake
hands."

"Say it, mate," said Nick, and he painfully lifted a wounded arm, to
place his bandaged hand in that of the old miner who had hated him all
his life.

A man had been started off as soon as the news was known to fetch more
help from the Black Tor; and, as tidings fly swiftly, assistance soon
came from every farm and cottage for miles, the women flocking up to
Ergles, and eagerly helping to bear the sufferers to their homes.

Sir Edward and Sir Morton went last, each borne upon a litter, Minnie
being provided with a pony, led by one of her father's men, who kept on
shaking his head and saying that he couldn't understand it, for it
seemed so strange that his master and young mistress and their leaders
should be going up to the Black Tor.

He said this to Nick Garth, who was lying with closed eyes upon a
roughly-made litter of poles.

"Well," said Nick roughly, "who can?  It's 'cause they say the world
turns round, and sometimes we're standing on our heads and sometimes on
our feet; we're on our heads now, and it's o' no use to kick when your
legs are in the air."

There was one more task to see to, though, before Mark left the place,
with its plunder in charge of Dan Rugg and a guard, so that the robbers'
stores could be restored to their rightful owners.

Over this matter Mark had a whispered consultation with the two wounded
knights, and then went off to Rugg.

"Well, yes, Master Mark," said that worthy; "I was thinking o' something
o' that sort.  Right in that little chamber place.  A good thick wall,
and well made, with plenty o' lime.  It wouldn't seem Christian-like to
throw 'em out on the hill among the stones; and you see there's so many
ravens and crows."

Dummy Rugg kept as close to Mark as he could in these busy times, and
tried several times to speak to him, but without success.  At last,
though, the opportunity came.

"Oh, Master Mark," he said, in a tone full of reproach; "you ought to
have spoke out."

"When?  What about?"

"When I was sent back to take care of those nasty old lanterns.  But it
serves you right.  If I'd been there at the fight you wouldn't have been
hurt like that."

"And perhaps you'd have been killed.  Get out, you ungrateful dog!"

"Dog, am I?  Well, it's enough to make me bite."

"Bite away, then, Dummy.  I can't lift my arm to hit you now."

"Then I'll wait till you get well again.  But it was mean.  I never seem
to get a chance."

"Well, you are a grumbler, Dummy.  Here, you've done what none of us
could do--shown us how to end all this trouble, and pleased everybody,
and yet you're not happy."

"Happy?" said the boy; "who's to be happy after what I've done?  Why, I
shan't never dare to come past Ergles now in the dark."

"Why?"

"'Cause old Purlrose and his men'll come popping out to haunt me for
getting 'em killed.  I shall never like to come by there again."

"They won't come out this way, Dum," said Mark, trying to look very
serious; "they'll come the other way, and get into the mine to lie in
wait for you in the dark parts, and heave blocks of stones at you."

"Think they will, Master Mark?" gasped the boy, and his eyes and mouth
opened wide.

"Sure to."

"Get out: you're laughing at me."

"I'm more disposed to cry; to think of such a stout, brave lad as you
should believe such nonsense."

"Nonsense?" cried Dummy.  "What, don't you be--believe in ghosts and
bor--bogies, Master Mark?"

"Do I look as if I did?" cried Mark contemptuously.  "You wait till I
get well, and if you tell me then that you believe in such silly old
women's tales, I'll kick you."

Dummy grinned.

"You wouldn't," he said.  "But I say, Master Mark, think old Purlrose
will haunt me?"

"Bah!" ejaculated Mark.  "There, come along; I want to get home and let
Master Rayburn do something to my bit of a wound.  It hurts so I can
hardly walk."

"Here, let me carry you, Master Mark.  Pig-a-back.  I can."

"No, no, Dummy, old lad; but you come to the castle to-morrow, and say
you are to walk up and see me.  I shall have to be put to bed, I expect,
in the same room with young Ralph Darley."

"Then I shan't come," said the boy, scowling.

"Why?"

"'Cause I don't like him, and I don't like to see his father and their
girl took there as if they were friends."

"They are now, Dum, and there isn't going to be any more fighting in the
vale."

It was a strange scene when the slow procession wound its way up the
zigzag, at the top of which Mary Eden and Master Rayburn were waiting
with the women and the tiny wounded garrison to receive the fresh party
of injured folk.

Mary ran to her wounded father to embrace him, and then to Minnie
Darley, to whom she held out her hands, and the people cheered as the
two girls kissed.

Mary was about to lead the trembling girl in, but she shook her head and
went to her father's side; and then Mary looked round for her brother,
and ran to him, as he came up leaning upon Dummy's arm.

"Oh, Mark, darling! hurt?" she cried, flinging her arms about his neck.

"Just a bit," he said, with a sickly smile.  "You do as Minnie Darley
did.  Never mind me; go and stay with father.  He's more hurt than he'll
own to.  Ah, Master Rayburn! brought you some more work, but we've burnt
out the wasps."

"My brave boy!" cried the old man, wringing his hands.  "There, I'll
come to you as soon as I can.  I must go to those who are worse."

"Yes, yes," said Mark; "I've got my doctor here.  But tell me--young
Ralph?"

"Recovered his senses, and asked about his father and sister."

"Come along, Dummy," said Mark faintly; "let's go and tell him we've
brought them safe; and then you shall wash and bind up my cut."

He uttered a faint "Ah!" and would have fallen but for the boy's ready
arm; and the next minute he was being borne up the steps, pig-a-back
after all, though he had scouted the offer before.  He had fainted dead
away.



CHAPTER THIRTY TWO.

A DEAD FEUD.

Time glided away as fast in the days of James the First as it does in
the reign of our gentle Queen; and a year had gone by in the quiet
peaceful vale, where, to a man, all who had been in the great trouble
had more or less quickly recovered from their wounds.

The prisoners were the worst sufferers, and in the great friendly peace
brought about between the old lords of the land, partly by their own
manly feeling and the love that had somehow sprung up among their
children, the greatest of all the Christian virtues took deep root, and
flourished in a way that would have put the proverbial green bay tree to
shame.

Hence it was that, as very slowly one by one the miserable crippled
prisoners, so many wrecks, diseased by their own reckless life and
crippled by their wounds, struggled back slowly to a condition in which
perhaps a few years were left them for a better life, they were left
entirely in Master Rayburn's hands; and first one and then another was
sent off with a little money and a haversack of food to seek his friends
and trouble the peaceful valley no more.

It took nearly the year before the last of the wretched crew bade
farewell to the place, grateful or ungrateful, according to his nature,
after going through a long course of physical suffering; and by that
time Cliff Castle was pretty well restored, and the two lads, after a
long absence, were back home again to the land of mighty cliff, green
forest, and purling stream.

It was on one of those glorious early summer mornings when the air seems
full of joy, and it is a delight even to exist, that, as the sycamores
and beeches in their early green were alive with song, there came a
rattle of tiny bits of spar against Mark Eden's casement window, and he
sprang out of bed to throw it open and look down upon Ralph Darley,
armed with lissom rod over his shoulder and creel on back.

"Oh, I say," he cried, "asleep, and on a morning like this!"

"Yes, but you're too soon."

"Soon?  Why, I'm a quarter of an hour late.  Be quick, the May-fly are
up, and the trout feeding like mad, and as for the grayling, I saw the
biggest--oh! do make haste."

"Shan't be long."

"And Mark, tell Mary that father is going to bring Min up about twelve,
and they are to meet us with the dinner-basket up by the alder weir.
Well, why don't you make haste and dress?"

"I was thinking," said Mark, with a broad smile.

"What about?"

"Oh, here's Dummy with the net," cried Mark.  "Hi! you sir! why didn't
you come and call me at the proper time?"

"Morn', Master Ralph," said the lad, with a friendly grin.  Then with an
ill-used look up at the window:

"'Tis proper time.  You said six, and it aren't that yet."

"There," cried Mark; "you are too soon."

"Very well.  It was so fine; but I say, what were you thinking about?"

Mark grinned again.

"Is it so very comic?" said Ralph impatiently.

"That depends on what you say."

"Well, let's hear."

"I was thinking that you and I have never finished that fight."

"No; you haven't been down to steal our ravens.  I say, Mark, what do
you say?  Shall we?  They're building there again."

"Let 'em," said Mark, "in peace."

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Black Tor, by George Manville Fenn

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLACK TOR ***

***** This file should be named 21298.txt or 21298.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/2/9/21298/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
